The addition of N-acetyllactosamine to proteins (lactosamines) is a key step in the biosynthesis of many complex carbohydrates found on glycoproteins. The addition of N-acetyllactosamine is catalyzed by the glycosyltransferase enzyme N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases (GnT). There are two families of GnT, the MgtA family which adds the first GlcNAc to the Man5GlcNAc2 oligosaccharide precursor, and the MgtB family which adds the second GlcNAc and the remaining three sugars to give the mature N-acetyllactosamine structure on glycoproteins. The MgtA family includes the yeast gene ALG1 3 and the human gene GCNT1. The MgtB family includes the yeast gene ALG9 and the human gene MGAT3. The products of these genes all have transmembrane domains and are believed to be localized in the Golgi membrane. The ALG9 and MGAT3 genes have been mapped to the X-chromosome and are therefore not likely to be involved in CDG syndromes. The ALG1 gene has been identified in yeast and humans and encodes a single pass transmembrane protein with a large lumenal domain. The ALG1 gene product is responsible for the addition of the first GlcNAc to the precursor oligosaccharide. A mutation in the human ALG1 gene has been identified in a patient with CDG-I (congenital disorder of glycosylation). The patient was found to be a compound heterozygote with one mutation causing a truncation of the protein and the other a missense mutation. The absence of a functional ALG1 protein leads to a loss of N-acetylglucosaminylation of proteins and a severe form of CDG.
Sialooligosaccharides are a key component of many glycoproteins and are involved in a variety of biological functions. The majority of mammalian glycoproteins contains complex, branched N-linked oligosaccharides with a variety of terminal monosaccharides. The most common terminal monosaccharides are N-acetylneuraminic acid (NeuAc), N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc), and galactose (Gal). The transfer of these monosaccharides onto glycoproteins occurs in the Golgi by the action of specific glycosyltransferases. The synthesis of complex N-linked oligosaccharides is a highly ordered process involving the ordered action of a series of polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases (polypeptide GalNAc transferases), polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases (polypeptide GalNAc Ts), beta-1, 4-galactosyltransferase (beta4Gal T), and sialyltransferases (ST). The initial step in the synthesis of a typical complex N-linked oligosaccharide is the transfer of N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) from UDP-GalNAc to a polypeptide acceptor. This is followed by the addition of galactose and then N-acetylneuraminic acid (NeuAc). The final step in the synthesis of a complex N-linked oligosaccharide is the addition of a sialic acid to the galactose end of the oligosaccharide. There are two main forms of sialic acid in mammals, N-acetylneuraminic acid (NeuAc) and N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc). The majority of mammalian glycoproteins contain both forms of sialic acid, however, in some cases only one of these forms is present. The difference in the presence or absence of sialic acid is a result of the action of a specific cytidine monophosphate (CMP) -sialic acid synthetase encoded by the CMAS gene. The CMAS gene encodes for a CMP-sialic acid synthetase that is able to convert either CMP-Neu5Ac or CMP-Neu5Gc to their corresponding CMP-sialic acid synthetase. The synthetase encoded by the CMAS gene is specific for CMP-NeuAc or CMP-Neu5Gc and does not cross-react with other nucleotide sugars. The CMAS gene has been identified in a variety of organisms and has been shown to be highly conserved. The presence of a specific synthetase ensures that only the correct form of sialic acid is present in the Golgi. The CMAS gene has been identified in humans, mice, rats, and pigs. In humans, the presence of Neu5Gc is limited to the placenta and red blood cells. The presence of Neu5Gc in the glycoproteins of humans has been suggested to be associated with the development of human cancers and heart disease. The CMAS gene has also been identified in other animals including chickens, turkeys, and pigs. In these animals, Neu5Gc is not present in significant amounts and the absence of Neu5Gc has been suggested to be associated with the reduced incidence of human diseases.
The essential function of protists is their extensive surface display of proteins that mediate interactions with the environment. Proteins displayed on the surface of protists are tethered to the cell membrane by a lipid anchor that is structurally and biosynthetically distinct from the lipid anchor of mammalian cells. The lipid component of the protist glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor is based on myo-inositol rather than the sphingosine found in the mammalian GPI anchor. The protein component of the protist GPI anchor is also different from the protein component of the mammalian GPI anchor. The protein component of the protist GPI anchor is N-acylated, whereas the protein component of the mammalian GPI anchor is O-acylated. The protein component of the protist GPI anchor is also modified by phosphoethanolamine (EthN) that is not found in the mammalian GPI anchor. The EthN modification of the protist GPI anchor is unique in biology. The biosynthetic pathway that makes EthN-GPI anchors in protists is distinct from the pathway that makes EthN-lipid-anchors in mammals and in the yeast S. cerevisiae. The steps in the protist pathway that create the EthN-modification are identified in this article. The difference in the protein component of the protist and mammalian GPI anchors is the key to the absence of aGal epitope expression in the protist GPI anchor and the consequent absence of APAs in the cell. The absence of the APAs from the cell surface of protists results in the expression of APAs in serum and the formation of the A1P antigen that is the basis of the reaction that makes the protist disease Chagas disease a public health problem in Latin America. The absence of the APAs also results in the absence of the protist-specific protist GPI-anchored proteins that mediate important biological functions. The absence of the APAs also makes the study of the role of the GPI anchor in protists possible in the future.
The repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) is essential for the maintenance of genomic integrity and stability. Two pathways are available to repair DSBs in eukaryotes: homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). The choice of pathway is influenced by the phase of the cell cycle and the availability of sequence homology, but is also regulated by the presence of proteins that bind to the ends of the DSB. In the absence of sequence homology, NHEJ is the predominant repair mechanism. In this model, the ends of the DSB are recognized and bound by the Ku heterodimer (Ku7 0 and Ku8 0), which recruits the DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) to the DSB. The Mre1 1-Rad5 0-NBS1 (MRN) complex, and the CtIP protein also bind to the ends prior to ligation. DNA ligase IV in complex with XRCC4 and XLF (XRCC4-like factor) completes the repair. In contrast, when sequence homology is present, HR is the preferred mechanism of repair. The central component of HR is the recombinase Rad5 1, which is involved in both the recognition of homology and the search for complementary sequence. Rad5 1 binds to single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) created by the resection of the DSB to produce a filament of Rad5 1 that is actively involved in homology search. The formation of a heteroduplex between the single-stranded donor sequence and the homologous sequence in the sister chromatid or homologous chromosome is followed by DNA synthesis to fill in the gaps and to ligate the ends. The strand exchange activity of Rad5 1 is stimulated by the breast cancer susceptibility gene product BRCA2, which binds to Rad5 1 and stimulates its strand exchange activity. The tumor suppressor phosphatase and TENsin homolog (PTEN) also stimulates HR by preventing the accumulation of Rad5 1 at DSB sites. The activity of PTEN is mediated by its phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) -inhibitory activity, which also regulates the cell cycle checkpoint response to DNA damage.
The major function of the lysosome is to degrade and recycle cellular components and to maintain homeostasis in the metabolic pathways of the cell. As the endpoint of several distinct trafficking pathways, lysosomes receive material from the secretory pathway, the endocytic pathway and the autophagy pathway. In addition to these pathways, lysosomes can also receive material from the plasma membrane and the biosynthetic pathway of the Golgi. The formation of lysosomes is coordinated by the coordinated action of several genes to produce a functional lysosome. The soluble acid hydrolase cathepsin D is the most commonly used marker protein for lysosomes. The mannose 6-phosphate receptor (M6PR) recognizes the mannose 6-phosphate modification on lysosomal proteins to transport them to the lysosome. Once in the lysosome, the mannose 6-phosphate modification is removed by the enzyme cathepsin D protease, allowing the newly secreted protein to bind to the M6PR and be internalized. Once in the lysosome, acid hydrolases are activated, bind to the membrane and then are transported to the lysosome's interior by means of the lysosomal membrane proteins LAMP1 and LAMP2. The membrane proteins LAMP1 and LAMP2 are members of a gene family with several other members that are also found in other membranes of the cell such as the Golgi and plasma membranes. The presence of these proteins on the lysosomal membrane increases the water-solubility of the membrane, allowing the lysosome to stay intact and its contents to be released into the cytoplasm when needed. The expansion of the lysosomal compartment during cellular stress can result in the fusion of lysosomes with other cellular compartments such as the plasma membrane. This event is called lysosomal membrane permeabilization or LMP. The release of cathepsins from lysosomes can lead to cell death through the cleavage of critical cellular proteins, in particular the caspase cascade, or through the activation of the proinflammatory enzyme sPLA2. In neurodegenerative conditions like Alzheimer's disease, the lysosomal protease cathepsin D is thought to play a role in the cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) to produce the amyloid beta-peptide.
Mitochondria are involved in a variety of cellular functions and are particularly important for energy production in cells with high energy demands such as cardiac and skeletal muscle. The energy required for contraction is provided by the oxidation of nutrients, such as glucose, to produce the high-energy phosphate ATP. The mitochondrial electron transport chain is the major source of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which can damage cellular components and are detrimental to cells. To prevent the generation of ROS and to facilitate electron transport, the mitochondrial membrane is highly impermeable to ions and molecules. The mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) is a multiprotein complex in the inner mitochondrial membrane that is involved in the release of ions and proteins from mitochondria and is a key regulator of cell death. The formation of the mPTP is induced by a variety of stresses, including calcium overload, and is associated with the release of cytochrome c. In vitro, the addition of calcium can induce the formation of the mPTP and the release of cytochrome c. In vivo, the formation of the mPTP may be induced by ROS, and may be involved in cell death during ischemia and reperfusion of tissues. The mitochondrial permeability transition may also be involved in apoptotic cell death through the release of cytochrome c and other proteins, such as AIF (Apoptosis-inducing factor). The formation of the mPTP may be prevented by the ATP-dependent mitochondrial peptide opener, humanin, which is encoded by the HN1 gene. The absence of humanin increases mitochondrial permeability and enhances cell death, while overexpression of humanin protects mitochondria and cells against stress and reduces infarct size in a mouse model of myocardial infarction.
Taste or flavor perception is the conscious recognition of the taste of foods. Taste is a complex sensation involving multiple organs and tissues. The sense of taste is essential for the recognition and consumption of nutrients, and the avoidance of toxins. Taste is stimulated by chemical compounds found in the environment that are detected by taste receptors in the oral cavity. Taste receptors on the surface of taste receptor cells transduce the taste signal into neural action potentials that are then sent to the brain via the gustatory nerves. There are six basic taste sensations (sweet, salty, sour, umami, and bitter) that are sensed by five different taste receptors. Salty is sensed by two different proteins, the sodium channel NaV1. 4 and the sodium channel NaCT, both of which are expressed in the taste receptor cells. The TAS1Rs (taste receptors for sweet, umami, and savory tastes) are G-protein coupled receptors that are activated by amino acids and are coupled to the G protein gustducin. The TAS1Rs are activated by monobasic amino acids (L-amino acids) and are inhibited by the dipeptide L-proline-L-threonine. The umami taste is sensed by a heterodimer of the proteins TAS1R1 and TAS1R3. This receptor is activated by monosodium glutamate (MSG) and by the dipeptide 5-amino-1-hydroxy-cyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (cyclopropylglycine). The sour taste is sensed by the proton-sensing acid-sensing ion channel ASIC-3 and the voltage-gated potassium channel KCNQ4. The sweet taste is sensed by the protein TAS1R2 and the protein TAS1R3, which are expressed in a 2: 1 ratio. TAS1R2 is activated by the disaccharide sucrose and by the monosaccharide glucose. TAS1R3 is activated by the sweet proteins brazzein and saccharin. The response to bitter taste is mediated by the GPCR TAS2Rs, which are activated by a large and diverse set of compounds including many natural products. There are 2 5 known human bitter receptors, only a few of which have been characterized in detail. The bitter taste is sensed by the GPCR TAS2Rs, which are expressed in taste receptor cells in combination with the GPCR TAS2R1. The signaling pathway for TAS2Rs is similar to that of the TAS1Rs, with the exception that the G protein GNAT3 is used instead of gustducin. The response to bitter taste is thought to be mediated by the opening of ion channels, primarily potassium channels, but other channels such as calcium channels may also be involved. The response to bitter taste is suppressed by the presence of sweet taste, mediated by the heterodimer TAS1R2 and TAS1R3, which are activated by the sweet compounds sucrose and aspartame and inhibited by the coagonist sodium glutamate.
The body uses approximately 30% of the oxygen we breathe and 9 0% of the energy we produce is extracted from the hydrolysis of ATP. The hydrolysis of ATP is highly favorable and is coupled to the transport of ions across cell membranes by ATP-dependent ion channels or transporters. The movement of ions down their concentration gradients is essential for a variety of cellular processes, including the movement of water across cell membranes (osmosis). There are two major classes of ion channels or transporters that use the energy of ATP to drive transport: the ATP-synthase and P-type ATPases. The ATP-synthase uses the energy of electron transport in the mitochondrial electron transport chain to pump protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane, creating a proton gradient across the membrane that is used to drive ATP synthesis by the ATP-synthase. P-type ATPases are a large and diverse family of ion transporters that use the energy of ATP to transport ions against their concentration gradient. The P-type ATPases transport a variety of cations, including Na +, K +, Ca + + and H +, across cell membranes using the energy of ATP hydrolysis. The transport of these ions is essential for a variety of cellular processes, including the movement of water across cell membranes (osmosis). There are several classes of P-type ATPases, including the well-studied plasma membrane Ca + + -ATPases, Na + / K + -ATPases, and H + -ATPases. The sarco (endo) plasmic reticulum Ca + + -ATPases (SERCAs) are found in most eukaryotic cells and remove calcium from the cytoplasm and the ER and Golgi lumen. The crystal structure of the Ca + + -ATPase has revealed a complex structure with 1 0 transmembrane helices that includes a large cytoplasmic headpiece that contains the ATP binding site and the catalytic sites involved in ATP hydrolysis and ion transport. The sarco (endo) plasmic reticulum Ca + + -ATPases are also known as plasma membrane Ca + + -ATPases (PMCA) because of their similarity in sequence and function to the Ca + + -ATPases in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The crystal structure of the Ca + + -ATPase has provided a good model for the other P-type ATPases, including the Na + / K + -ATPase and H + -ATPase. The Na + / K + -ATPase is a heterodimer with a large alpha subunit and a smaller beta subunit. The beta subunit is required for the stability and folding of the alpha subunit and is also involved in the binding of the cations and their transport across the plasma membrane. The active transport of 3Na + out of the cell and 2K + into the cell is coupled to the extrusion of one molecule of ATP from the cytoplasm. The transport of 3Na + is coupled to the transport of 1molecule of each of the solute molecules lactate, pyruvate, and inorganic phosphate (Pi). The transport of 2K + is coupled to the transport of 1molecule of each of the organic molecules glutamate, aspartate and glutamine. The transport of 1molecule of each of these solutes is coupled to the transport of 2molecules of ATP. The energy of ATP is used to drive the transport of these solutes against their concentration gradients, using the energy of the ion gradients to drive the transport of these solutes. The energy of the ion gradients is also used to drive the transport of the other solutes.
The actin cytoskeleton plays a crucial role in lymphocyte chemotaxis. During chemotaxis, actin polymerization drives the cell membrane toward a chemoattractant, and the formation of stable actin pseudopods at the leading edge of the cell facilitates this movement. The formation of stable actin pseudopods is regulated by the Rac GTPase and cortactin. Cortactin is a multi-domain protein that binds to both actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex, which nucleates the formation of new actin filaments and promotes the growth of actin branches. In lymphocytes, cortactin is required for chemotaxis and is required for the formation of stable actin pseudopods. The activation of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 stimulates Rac and cortactin activation. The activation of Rac also stimulates the phosphorylation of cortactin by the tyrosine kinase Abl. The phosphorylation of cortactin by Abl is required for the localization of cortactin to the leading edge of the cell and for chemotaxis. The regulation of cortactin phosphorylation by Abl is part of a feedback loop that enhances the localization of cortactin to the leading edge and further stimulates chemotaxis. Other proteins involved in the regulation of actin polymerization and chemotaxis in lymphocytes include CrkL, CD21, and WASP. CrkL is a substrate of the tyrosine kinase Lyn and is required for chemotaxis and actin polymerization in lymphocytes. CrkL and Abl interact with each other and with other proteins to regulate actin polymerization and chemotaxis. CD21 is also required for actin polymerization and chemotaxis in lymphocytes. WASP is a member of the WASP family of proteins that regulate actin polymerization and is activated by the GTPase Rac. In addition to regulating actin polymerization, cortactin also interacts with microtubules. The interaction of cortactin with microtubules may help to stabilize leading edge pseudopods and facilitate chemotaxis.
Neutrophils are key players in the immune system, providing protection against invading bacteria and fungi through the release of reactive oxygen species and the release of antimicrobial peptides called defensins. Neutrophils also play a role in the immune response through the expression of Fc receptors and the presence of antigen-presenting molecules, the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). When stimulated by antigen, neutrophils express MHC-II and increase their expression of complement receptors, CD1 1b and CD3 2b. The Fc portion of IgG is recognized by the neutrophil receptor for IgG, FcgammaRIIIb, and cross-linking of FcgammaRIIIb with the antigen-antibody complex activates the respiratory burst. The neutrophil MHC-II molecule is recognized by T cells and is called FcgammaRIIIb. The MHC-II molecule expressed by neutrophils is called FcgammaRIIIb. The gene for FcgammaRIIIb is unique in the genome, having two copies of the gene, FCGR3B, which encodes for the neutrophil MHC-II molecule. The protein product of the FCGR3B gene is called CD1 6b. The FcgammaRIIIb protein is expressed on the surface of neutrophils in very low copy number compared to other neutrophil proteins.
The immune system is comprised of two distinct but interacting cell types, B cells and T cells, that together provide a specific response to a specific antigen. The B cell receptor and the T cell receptor provide for the specific response, and the coordinate function of these cells is essential for the functioning of the immune system. B cells produce immunoglobulins to bind and inactivate specific antigens, and T cells produce factors that stimulate the proliferation and activation of other immune cells in response to the specific antigen. B and T cells express a receptor complex containing a specific immunoglobulin chain (the B cell receptor) or a T cell receptor complex that is composed of multiple polypeptide chains (the T cell receptor). The B cell receptor is formed from the immunoglobulin heavy chain and the lambda or kappa light chain. The T cell receptor is formed from the alpha, beta, and gamma chains in association with the CD3 complex. Binding of antigen by the B cell or T cell receptor activates a signal transduction pathway that results in the activation of B and T cells. During an immune response, B and T cells are induced to proliferate and become activated, and this is accompanied by changes in the expression of many genes. Transcriptional regulation plays an important role in the activation of B and T cells. Transcriptional regulation is a complex process involving many different transcription factors that interact with each other and with the basal transcription machinery to regulate gene expression. B and T cell activation involves a complex interplay of transcription factors that includes both positive and negative regulatory elements.
The integrin family of cell surface receptors interact with the extracellular matrix (ECM) through a conserved amino acid sequence, the RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartic acid). Integrins do not themselves possess a transmembrane or cytoplasmic domain but rely on the association of transmembrane proteins with the cytoskeleton (actin filaments) and with each other (clustering) for signal transduction. Integrins do not possess a kinase domain but rely on association with other proteins to transmit signals. They do so by recruiting and / or organizing signalling complexes to specific regions of the cell membrane. In addition to playing a structural role integrins act as adhesion molecules linking the ECM to the cytoskeleton and also transducing signals into the cytoplasm upon interaction with the ECM. The nonintegrin cell surface receptors of the cadherin family mediate cell-cell adhesion. Desmosomes provide a strong adhesion between cells but do not directly mediate adhesion to the ECM. Desmosomal cadherins interact with the intermediate filament system (vimentin and desmin) but do not appear to transmit signals. The tight junction protein, occludins, is found in tight junctions with the actin cytoskeleton. The immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily of cell adhesion molecules includes members involved in cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions. The Ig superfamily member NCAM (neuronal cell adhesion molecule) is involved in both cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions. In addition to mediating adhesion, NCAMs transduce signals into the cytoplasm upon interaction with its ligand, L1.
The interaction of the sarcolemma with the cytoskeleton is essential for muscle cell function. The cytoskeleton provides a stable scaffold against which other cellular structures can deform, and provides a means of integrating internal and external signals. The cytoskeleton is also involved in the transport of ions and organelles into and out of the muscle cell. Muscle cells have a complex array of cytoskeletal elements including actin filaments, microtubules and intermediate filaments. Actin filaments, which form the major stress bearing structure of the muscle cell, are oriented with their minus ends near the membrane and their plus ends toward the center of the cell. The ends of the actin filaments are anchored to the cell membrane by a multiprotein complex known as the costameres. The microtubule system is less complex, with individual microtubules lying parallel to the long axis of the muscle cell. Intermediate filaments, also known as desmin filaments, are oriented across the width of the muscle cell and are associated with the plasma membrane via the dystrophica glycoprotein complex (DGC). The DGC is a multiprotein complex containing the proteins dystrophin, Dach, and the sarcoglycans. Mutations in any of these genes result in the muscle disease Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD). The sarcoglycans (alpha, beta, gamma, and delta) are transmembrane proteins in the sarcolemma that form part of a larger complex known as the DGC. The absence of the sarcoglycans results in the absence of the entire complex, the absence of the costameres and the disruption of the actin filaments network. The microtubule system appears to be stabilized by the microtubule associated protein MAP1, which is associated with the microtubule plus ends. The interaction of the microtubule and DGC systems is regulated by the calcium binding protein calpain. calpain1 cleaves the microtubule associated protein MAP1, releasing the stabilization of microtubules provided by MAP1, allowing the formation of new microtubule arrays.
This group of genes does not group into a meaningful cluster.
The liver is responsible for the production and detoxification of a number of important metabolic pathways including glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, the urea cycle, and gluconeogenesis. The liver also plays a central role in the metabolism of drugs and xenobiotics. It is the site of the detoxification of drugs and xenobiotics through a variety of enzymatic pathways including oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, and conjugation. The toxicity of drugs and xenobiotics is often associated with their metabolism in the liver. The liver has a high concentration of mitochondria and has a high energy requirement to support its high rate of metabolism. The liver is also the site of glucose production, converting glycogen to glucose. The liver is a key metabolic organ, and its function is closely linked to the energy needs of the body. Inside the hepatocyte, the majority of energy is produced through oxidation of nutrients, with the exception of glucose, which is produced from glycogen. The body stores large quantities of glycogen, and the liver is responsible for the rapid release of this glucose. The liver also has a high concentration of mitochondria, which are required for the high energy demands of the liver and provide the energy for many of the metabolic pathways in the liver. The high energy requirement of the liver and the abundance of mitochondria make the liver a key metabolic organ. The liver is also the site of gluconeogenesis, the production of glucose from non-carbohydrate precursors. Gluconeogenesis occurs in the liver and kidneys under conditions of prolonged fasting or low glucose levels. Gluconeogenesis in the liver is stimulated by the hormones glucagon and glucocorticoids. The liver produces glucose primarily through the Cori cycle (pyruvate + acetyl-CoA + oxaloacetate + GTP > glucose) and the Embden-Meyerhof pathway (GAP + dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) + glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP) + E4P + Pi > glucose). Gluconeogenesis from glycerol is very limited, and only occurs during times of stress or when glucose levels are very low. The Cori cycle and the Embden-Meyerhof pathway are both glycolytic pathways that branch off from glycolysis at the level of PEP. The final two steps of gluconeogenesis are the same for both pathways, with the exception of the fate of GAP. In the Cori cycle, pyruvate is converted to oxaloacetate (OAA) and then to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). In the Embden-Meyerhof pathway, GAP is converted to DHAP, which is then converted to pyruvate. The final step in gluconeogenesis is the conversion of OAA to PEP. The energy required to convert glucose to PEP is provided by the oxidation of glucose, pyruvate, or lactate. The liver has a high concentration of mitochondria, and the high energy requirement of the liver may in part be satisfied through mitochondrial metabolism. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED) < / FREETEXT > < / ABSTRACT > ▃
The Krebs cycle (also called the citric acid cycle) is a fundamental metabolic pathway involving eight enzymes essential for energy production through aerobic respiration and is also a major source of biosynthetic building blocks required for the biosynthesis of amino acids, fatty acids and other essential metabolites. The Krebs cycle is also closely linked to other metabolic pathways, including gluconeogenesis, the biosynthesis of fatty acids, and the oxidation of pyruvate. The Krebs cycle is a sequence of eight chemical reactions that condense carbon dioxide, acetyl-CoA, and a reducing equivalent (NADH or FADH2) to produce carbon dioxide, reduced nicotinamide nucleotides, and a reduced two-carbon molecule, which then enters the Kreb's (or glycolytic) cycle to produce more energy and additional reducing potential. The Krebs cycle is a cyclic series of eight reactions that are essential for the oxidation of carbohydrates, fats and other sources of energy. The pathway begins with the carboxylation of pyruvate to form oxaloacetate (OAA) and then the reduction of OAA to malate. The next reaction in the cycle is the condensation of acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate to form citrate. Citrate is then isomerized to produce isocitrate. Isomerase activity is a key regulatory point in the cycle, and is controlled by the availability of NADH and acetyl-CoA. The next step in the cycle is the decarboxylation of isocitrate to produce alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG). AKG is a key intermediate in the Krebs cycle and is a precursor to both succinyl-CoA and pyruvate. The next enzyme in the cycle is the dehydrogenase reaction that converts pyruvate and acetyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA and carbon dioxide. The cycle is completed with the conversion of malate to fumarate and then to citrate. The cycle is tightly regulated at each step to prevent accumulation of metabolic intermediates and to maintain the appropriate ratios of the various intermediate compounds. The irreversible oxidation of pyruvate to carbon dioxide is catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH). The activity of PDH is inhibited by phosphorylation of its E1alpha subunit by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK). The activity of PDH is also regulated by the phosphorylation state of the E1alpha subunit. The activity of PDK is regulated by the ATP / ADP ratio and the NADH / NAD (+) ratio, both of which are closely linked to the energy status of the cell. The activity of the Krebs cycle is closely linked to the availability of oxygen, although the mechanisms responsible for this relationship are not known. One possibility is that oxygen affects the activity of Krebs cycle enzymes indirectly through the production of ATP, which is required for the activity of some Krebs cycle enzymes. Another possibility is that oxygen directly affects the structure or expression of Krebs cycle enzymes.
The glycolytic pathway begins with the simple sugar glucose and leads to the production of pyruvate and the Kreb's cycle. Dietary carbohydrates include a variety of sugars that are funneled into glycolysis to supply energy, including other monosaccharides, disaccharides, and polysaccharides like starch. Fructose is an abundant monosaccharide in fruit and is also found in the common disaccharide sucrose. Fructose enters glycolysis through a different pathway in the liver and kidney, the ketofructose pathway. Fructose is first converted to ketofructose by ketohexokinase. Ketofructokinase then converts ketofructose to fructose 6-phosphate. Fructose 6-phosphate is isomerized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and then to dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) by ketofructose-phosphate isomerase. DHAP is an important intermediate in glycolysis and is converted to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate by glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. The last step of glycolysis is the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, which enters the Kreb's cycle to produce the energy required for a cell to meet its energy demands. The first two steps of this pathway are similar to the pathway of glucose, with the difference being that glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate is converted to pyruvate while fructose-6-phosphate is isomerized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The difference is that the isomerase in the ketofructose pathway is a Schiff base isomerase, transferring a nitrogen atom between carbons rather than a carbon-carbon bond. The nitrogen in fructose-6-phosphate is transferred to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to form dihydroxyacetone phosphate. The difference in the mechanism between the ketofructose and glycolytic pathways is that the isomerase in the ketofructose pathway is an enzyme. The nitrogen in ketofructose-phosphate isomerase is transferred to ketofructose-phosphate isomerase to form glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and sedoheptulose-7-phosphate. The isomerase in the ketofructose pathway is also a transferase, transferring a nitrogen between two different molecules. The nitrogen in ketofructose-phosphate isomerase is transferred to ketofructose-phosphate isomerase to form glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and nitrogen is released as ammonia. The nitrogen in glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate is transferred to pyruvate to form lactate. The ketofructose pathway is present in liver and in some plants it is the only pathway for fructose consumption. The presence of this pathway in plants suggests that it may provide a route for the production of food from fructose. The ketofructose pathway is not present in mammals. The enzymes in the ketofructose pathway are present in plants but do not appear to function in glycolysis in plants. The enzymes in the ketofructose pathway are also found in bacteria, suggesting that the pathway may have evolved from a common ancestor enzyme that was modified to become involved in the biosynthesis of amino acids.
The electron transport system of mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is required for the biosynthesis of steroid hormones from cholesterol in the adrenal cortex and gonads. The first step is the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone by the mitochondrial cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme (P4 5 0scc). Pregnenolone is then converted to progesterone in the ER by the enzymes 3betaHSD, 2 1OH, and 1 7OH. The last step is the conversion of progesterone to deoxycorticosterone and then to aldosterone by the sequential actions of 3alphaHSD, 2betaHSD, and 1alphaOH. The final steps in the biosynthesis of cortisol and corticosterone in the adrenal cortex and the synthesis of aldosterone in the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex require the sequential actions of 3beta-HSD, 20alphaHSD, and 18OHSD. The enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of corticosteroids are found in the mitochondrial inner membrane and in the ER. The enzymes involved in the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone are found in the mitochondrial membrane, while the enzymes involved in the subsequent conversions of pregnenolone to the corticosteroids are found in the ER. The proteins involved in these reactions are all members of large gene families. The proteins encoded by the CYP1 1A, CYP1 1B, and CYP1 7 genes belong to the cytochrome P4 5 0 gene family, and are all heme-containing monooxygenases. The P4 5 0scc enzyme catalyzes the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone in a reaction that requires reduced cytochrome P4 5 0 (CPR) as a cofactor. The first step in the biosynthesis of all corticosteroids is the cleavage of the cholesterol side chain by P4 5 0scc. This reaction is catalyzed by P4 5 0scc and is the rate-limiting step in corticosteroid biosynthesis. The next step is the conversion of pregnenolone to progesterone by P4 5 0c2 1. This reaction is also catalyzed by P4 5 0scc but is not coupled to electron transport from NADPH to oxygen. The third step in the biosynthesis of cortisol and corticosterone is the conversion of progesterone to deoxycorticosterone by P4 5 0aldo. This reaction is also catalyzed by P4 5 0c2 1, but is stimulated by the presence of the NADPH-dependent steroid reductase CPR. The final step in the biosynthesis of aldosterone is the conversion of deoxycorticosterone to aldosterone by 3alphaHSD, 2betaHSD, and 18OHSD. This reaction is catalyzed by a single enzyme, 3alphaHSD. The expression of the genes for these enzymes is regulated coordinately by the pituitary hormone ACTH and by the presence of cortisol and corticosterone in the feedback inhibition of ACTH secretion.
The metabolism of steroid hormones is a key component of human health. The enzymes that catalyze these reactions are found in many different tissues, but are most active in steroid-metabolizing tissues such as liver and steroid-producing tissues such as the adrenal cortex and testis. The adrenal cortex produces a variety of steroid hormones including cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). The enzymes that catalyze the metabolism of these steroid hormones are found in the adrenal cortex as well. The steroid hormones are synthesized in the adrenal cortex from cholesterol, and the enzymes that catalyze these reactions are found in the mitochondria and inner mitochondrial membrane. The first step in the synthesis of all steroid hormones is the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone by the enzyme cytochrome P4 5 0 side chain cleavage (P4 5 0scc). Pregnenolone is the common precursor for all steroid hormones. DHEA is the most abundant steroid in the blood and is synthesized in the adrenal cortex by the sequential action of 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3betaHSD) and steroid-1 7alpha-monooxygenase (CYP1 7A1). DHEA is sulfated at the C-3position by DHEA sulfotransferase (SULT2A1), and this sulfated DHEA (DHEA-S) is the most abundant steroid in blood. The synthesis of steroid hormones in the adrenal cortex is regulated by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). ACTH stimulates the synthesis of steroid hormones and also regulates the enzymes that catalyze the synthesis of these hormones. The activity of 3betaHSD and CYP1 7A1 are regulated by ACTH, while CYP1 7A1 activity is also regulated by the availability of cholesterol. The activity of SULT2A1 is also regulated by ACTH. In addition to regulating the activity of the enzymes that catalyze the synthesis of steroid hormones, ACTH regulates the expression of several of the enzymes that metabolize steroid hormones. The activity of hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 116 (HSD 116), which catalyzes the reduction of estrone, estradiol, and testosterone to their corresponding less active forms, is increased by ACTH. In contrast, the activity of hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 12 (HSD 12), which catalyzes the oxidation of steroids, is decreased by ACTH. The activity of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A6, which catalyzes the glucuronidation of a variety of drugs and environmental toxins, is also increased by ACTH. In addition to regulating the activity of drug-metabolizing enzymes, UGTA1 is also involved in the metabolism of steroid hormones. UGTA1 is expressed in the adrenal cortex as well. The activity of UGTA1 toward steroid hormones is lower than that of UGTA1 toward drugs and toxins. However, the activity of UGTA1 toward steroid hormones is increased by ACTH, similar to the increase in activity of UGTA1 toward drugs and toxins.
The essential amino acid L-methionine is formed from L-threonine by the enzyme L-methionine-SR. L-Methionine is a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of proteins, vitamins (B1 2 and B6) and amino acids (cysteine, leucine and isoleucine). The biosynthesis of L-methionine from L-threonine is a major source of the methyl group in DNA methylation. The biosynthesis of L-methionine from L-threonine also provides a source of one-carbon units that are involved in the biosynthesis of tetrahydrofolate, thymidine, methionine and the methyl groups of SAM. The biosynthesis of L-methionine from L-threonine is a major source of methyl groups for methylation reactions in the cell. L-Cystathionine is formed from L-cysteine by the enzyme cystathionine beta-synthase. Cystathionine is then cleaved to form cysteine and alpha-ketobutyrate by the enzyme cystathionine gamma-lyase. alpha-Ketobutyrate is a metabolic intermediate in the degradation of both valine and isoleucine. The biosynthesis of L-methionine from L-threonine is a major source of one-carbon units for the biosynthesis of tetrahydrofolate, thymidine, methionine and SAM. The biosynthesis of L-methionine from L-threonine is a major source of SAM. The biosynthesis of L-methionine from L-threonine is a major source of SAM. Thyil-ine synthase catalyzes the condensation of tetrahydrofolate and oxobutyryl-THF with serine to form CH2-THF and homoserine. CH2-THF is a donor in methylation reactions. The methylation of deoxythymidine to form thymidylate is catalyzed by thymidylate synthase. The methylation of adenosine3 9 to form SAM is catalyzed by SAM-dependent methyltransferases. The methylation of proteins is catalyzed by protein methyltransferases. The methylation of DNA, proteins and lipids is involved in a large variety of cellular processes.
DNA methylation is one of the most important mechanisms of gene regulation in eukaryotes. The addition of a methyl group to the fifth carbon of cytosine bases in CpG dinucleotides is associated with gene silencing. The addition of the methyl group is catalyzed by DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), which use S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) as the methyl donor. DNMTs are classified as maintenance DNMTs (Dnmt1) and de novo methyltransferases (Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b). Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b are involved in the de novo methylation of DNA, whereas Dnmt1 is responsible for the maintenance of DNA methylation after DNA replication. The regulation of DNA methylation is a complex process involving many factors. One of the factors that affects DNA methylation is the availability of the methyl donor, AdoMet. AdoMet is synthesized from methionine and ATP by methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT). The activity of MAT is affected by the essential amino acid, L-methionine. The concentration of L-methionine in plasma is approximately 300mumol/ L, and is maintained within this range by the regulated degradation of L-methionine to methanethiol and the transmethylation of homocysteine to form methionine. The transsulfuration pathway, in which cysteine is converted to glutathione, plays an important role in the regulation of the intracellular concentration of cysteine and the availability of AdoMet. Glutathione is an important intracellular reducing agent, and its synthesis requires the removal of oxidized glutathione (GSSG). GSSG is reduced to reduced glutathione (GSH) with the consumption of NADPH. The reduced glutathione level is restored by the regeneration of NADPH from NADP + by glutathione reductase. The availability of L-methionine and cysteine affects DNA methylation through their effect on the availability of AdoMet. L-methionine adenosyltransferase is the first and rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis of AdoMet. The activity of MAT is affected by the concentration of its substrate, AdoMet, and its product, S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine (AdoHcy). High concentrations of AdoHcy inhibit Dnmt activity and DNA methylation. The methylation of cytosine residues in DNA is enhanced by the presence of the methyl-binding protein, Mets, which specifically binds to the hemimethylated DNA and recruits Dnmt1 to the methylated DNA. The binding of Mets to DNA prevents further methylation and the methylation of other DNA molecules.
Proteoglycans are a diverse group of proteins that share a common amino acid sequence but differ in their attached polysaccharide chains. The chondroitin sulfate and heparan sulfate chains are examples of polysaccharides found in proteoglycans. Proteoglycans are found in the extracellular matrix and on the cell surface. Proteoglycans are involved in a variety of biological functions such as development, cell adhesion, migration and neurite outgrowth. The chondroitin sulfate and heparan sulfate chains are synthesized by the glycosyltransferases chondroitin sulfate synthase (ChSase) and heparan sulfate synthase (Hsepase), respectively. These enzymes polymerize the sugar chains using nucleotide-sugar donors and an acceptor molecule. The sugar chains are then modified by sulfation, phosphorylation and epimerization. The addition of sulfate groups is a key modification that regulates the biological activity of these polysaccharides. The addition of sulfate groups to the hydroxyl groups of the sugars in the polysaccharides is catalyzed by specific sulfotransferases. ChSase is specific for UDP-glucuronic acid and only adds glucuronic acid residues to the growing chain. Hsepase is specific for UDP-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine and adds N-acetyl-glucosamine residues to the chain. The addition of sulfate groups to the polysaccharides is catalyzed by specific sulfotransferases. ChSase is inhibited by the addition of sulfate groups to the 3position of the GlcA residue they adds. The addition of sulfate groups to the 6position of the GlcNAc residue in heparan sulfate is catalyzed by Hsepase. There are at least 3 different heparan sulfotransferases. One of these, Hsepase1, is specific for the 3position of the GlcA residue and another, Hsepase2, is specific for the 2position of the GlcN residue. A third enzyme, ChSase-B, acts on both the 3position of the GlcA and the 2position of the GlcNAc residue. The addition of sulfate groups to the uronate residues in the chondroitin sulfate chains is catalyzed by the chondroitin sulfate synthase (CSase). There are at least 3 different chondroitin sulfotransferases. One of these, CSase3, is specific for the 4position of the GlcA residue.
The human ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter superfamily is comprised of 4 9 genes divided into 7 subfamilies (ABCA-ABCG) based on their sequence similarities and similarities in their predicted transmembrane domains and ATP binding cassettes. The ABCA subfamily members ABCA1, ABCA2, and ABCA3 are involved in the transport of phospholipids, sterols, and phospholipids across biological membranes. The ABCB subfamily members are involved in the transport of a diverse range of substrates including ions, xenobiotics, peptides, and lipids. The ABCC subfamily members are involved in the transport of ions, lipids, peptides, and xenobiotics. The ABCD and ABCE subfamilies are both involved in the transport of lipids. The ABCG subfamily members are involved in the transport of sterols. In addition to these major subfamilies, several less well-characterized members of the ABC transporter superfamily exist. These less-studied members include ABCG2, ABCA9, and ABCB1 1. This review will discuss the currently known functions and substrates of these less-studied members of the ABC transporter superfamily.
The degradation of mRNA plays an important role in regulating gene expression. In eukaryotes, mRNA is degraded by two distinct pathways: a 5 '-exonuclease pathway and a 3' -exonuclease pathway. The major mRNA degradation pathway in yeast is the 3 '-exonuclease pathway, in which the poly (A) tail is removed by the poly (A) -specific ribonuclease (PARN) and the resulting mRNA is degraded by the exosome. The exosome is a complex of at least 1 0 proteins, including a 3' -5 'exoribonuclease, a 3' -exonuclease, a helicase, and a RNA-binding protein. The helicase and the RNA-binding protein are believed to unwind the RNA duplex and / or trim the oligo (A) tail prior to degradation by the 3 '-exonuclease. The poly (A) -ribonuclease is a 3' -exonuclease that degrades the mRNA after it has been trimmed to a few residues. The proteins that compose the exosome are conserved from yeast to man. The yeast exosome contains at least six proteins (Rrp4 1, Rrp4 2, Rrp4 3, Mtr3, Ski6p and Yhm1) that are essential for viability in yeast. The functions of the other proteins in the exosome are not known. One possibility is that they are cofactors that enhance the activity or specificity of the exosome, but it has also been suggested that they may be involved in the assembly of the exosome. Proteins that interact with the exosome may also regulate its activity. One such protein is Lrp1, a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) protein that interacts with the yeast exosome and represses the 3 '-exonuclease activity of the complex. Lrp1 is a member of a family of proteins that contain LRRs, including Pumilio and Tristetraprolin proteins that bind to and repress the activity of mRNAs containing AU-rich elements (AREs). ARE sequences in the 3' -untranslated region of mRNAs regulate their decay, translation and splicing. Tristetraprolin and Pumilio proteins bind to AREs and stimulate mRNA degradation, while Lrp1 represses degradation. The Lrp1 repression of the yeast exosome may provide a model for the Tristetraprolin and Pumilio repression of ARE-containing mRNAs in mammals.
DNA replication in eukaryotes is conducted by a series of conserved proteins that are encoded by a conserved set of genes. The replication proteins are organized into a series of discrete complexes that act in a concerted fashion to replicate the genome. The first step in replication of the eukaryotic genome is the formation of a replication origin. The replication origin in eukaryotes is defined by the binding of the Origin Recognition Complex (ORC). ORC, comprised of six proteins, binds to replication origins throughout the cell cycle. The binding of ORC, along with Cdc6 / 18 and Cdt1, recruits the mini-chromosome maintenance complex (Mcm) proteins 2-7 to the replication origins. The Mcm complex is part of the replication helicase and moves along with the DNA polymerase and other factors to the replication fork to unwind the DNA. The elongation phase of replication is conducted by DNA polymerase alpha-primase, DNA polymerase delta and DNA ligase I to replicate the genome. The polymerases and ligase are loaded onto the DNA by the replication fork proteins. The coordination of these proteins is essential for efficient and accurate replication of the genome.
The spliceosome is a complex of snRNPs (small nuclear ribonucleoproteins) and many associated proteins that catalyzes the splicing of nuclear pre-mRNAs. The spliceosome is composed of at least 1 7 distinct proteins and five snRNAs (U1, U2, U4, U5 and U6). The spliceosome assembles on the pre-mRNA in a stepwise manner, forming a complex that catalyzes the two transesterification reactions that ligate the exons. The spliceosome is highly conserved throughout evolution and most likely has been assembled from common components for many years. The snRNAs are essential for spliceosome function and are part of the spliceosome complex. The U6 snRNA is most similar in sequence and structure to the spliceosomal snRNA U1, and is believed to pair with the 5'splice site during the first step of splicing. The U2 snRNA is involved in the formation of the branch site and the recognition of the branch site and 5' splice site during the second step of splicing. The U5 and U4 snRNAs are also conserved and are part of the spliceosome, together with several associated proteins. The U5 and U4 snRNAs are believed to pair with each other to form a di-snRNA complex that is believed to rearrange during the splicing reaction. The U6 snRNA, together with the U5 snRNA, forms the catalytic core of the spliceosome. The proteins that are associated with the snRNAs and the spliceosome also are highly conserved and are called splicing factors. The splicing factors are classified into two major groups: the DEAD-box helicases and the snRNP-associated proteins. The helicases are involved in all aspects of RNA metabolism and are required for the splicing reaction. The snRNP-associated proteins are believed to stabilize the structure of the snRNAs and are required for the assembly of the spliceosome. The splicing factors that are directly involved in the splicing reaction include the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs) U1, U2, U4, and U5 and several protein factors that are loosely associated with the snRNPs. The U1 snRNP binds to the 5'splice site, and the U2 snRNP binds to the branch site and the 5' splice site. The U4 / U6 and U5 snRNPs are required for the formation of the spliceosome and are known as the U4 / U6.U5 tri-snRNP. The splicing reaction is completed in a highly coordinated manner and is catalyzed by the multiprotein spliceosome. The spliceosome is highly dynamic and is regulated by many of the same factors that are involved in transcription and RNA processing.
The proteasome is a multi-subunit protease complex that degrades proteins that are tagged with ubiquitin. The function of the proteasome is to remove damaged or unneeded proteins from the cell and to produce peptides for antigen presentation on the cell surface for recognition by immune cells. The proteasome is composed of four rings each with 14 subunits stacked on top of each other that are stacked on each other to form a cylindrical structure. The PA70 0 regulatory complex is stacked on top of the 14-subunit core proteasome to form a 26S proteasome. Proteins that are to be degraded by the proteasome are tagged with ubiquitin, a 7 6-amino acid peptide that is covalently attached to proteins through a lysine residue. The addition of ubiquitin is a highly conserved process that is essential for protein degradation by the proteasome. The PA28 regulatory complex is involved in the recognition and binding of ubiquitin-tagged proteins by the proteasome. The PA28 complex is also part of the core proteasome in the 26S proteasome. The PA70 and PA28 complexes are encoded by separate genes and are regulated independently. The PA28 complex is only present in the 26S proteasome and is required for the binding of ubiquitin-tagged proteins and the opening of the gate in the 20S core particle to allow the passage of proteins into the proteolytic chamber of the proteasome. The PA70 0 complex is a 1 9S regulatory complex that opens up the gate in the core particle and is required for the entry of proteins but is not involved in the binding of ubiquitin-tagged proteins. The PA28 complex is also called the 19S regulatory complex. There are at least three different 26S proteasomes that differ in their subunit composition and are designated PA70 0, PA50 and PA2 8 proteasomes. The PA70 0 complex is found in the nucleus and is believed to be involved in the degradation of nuclear proteins. The PA50 and PA2 8 proteasomes are found in the cytoplasm and are involved in antigen processing for presentation of peptides to immune cells in the immune system. The PA28 complex is also known as PA2 8 and is a homo-oligomer or a hetero-oligomer of subunits. The PA28 complex is required for the proteolytic activity of the proteasome and is also called the 19S regulatory complex. The PA70 and PA28 complexes are reversibly associated with the core particle to form the 3-1 1S proteasome. The different 26S proteasomes have different substrate specificities and are regulated differently. The PA70 0 complex is inhibited by ubiquitin and the binding of peptides to the core particle. The PA28 complex is stimulated by ubiquitin and is also called the 19S regulatory complex.
The targeting and translocation of proteins into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria are both mediated by signal recognition particles (SRPs) and their cognate receptors on the membrane. Both of these pathways use a similar mechanism to target proteins to the membrane and translocate them across the membrane. The targeting of proteins to the ER is mediated by the SRP and the ER translocon. The targeting of proteins to the mitochondria is mediated by the mitochondrial SRP (MSRP) and the mitochondrial translocon. In both cases, the targeting of the ribosome-nascent chain complex (RNC) to the translocon is mediated by the SRPs. The SRP binds to the emerging polypeptide chain near the ribosome, and the translocon is gated by the SRP. The ribosome-nascent chain complex is then transferred to the translocon, and the polypeptide is inserted into the membrane or translocated out of the membrane. The ER and MSRP are both composed of distinct protein subunits, and the subunits are homologous to each other. The SRP is composed of 6SRP subunits (SRP9, SRP1 4, SRP1 9, SRP5 4 and Alu RNA) and 1ribosome. The Alu RNA in the SRP binds to the translocon and inhibits further translocation. The MSRP is composed of 1MsrA RNA, 1Msrp and 1SRP2. The 1SRP2 subunit is homologous to the SRP5 4 subunit of the SRP. The 1Msrp is homologous to the FtsY subunit of the translocon. The FtsY subunit catalyzes the GTP-dependent insertion of proteins into the membrane, and the 1SRP2 subunit stimulates the GTPase activity of FtsY. The SRP and MSRP are both structurally and functionally distinct from the signal recognition particle in the ER (SRP ER). The SRP and ER translocon are ancestrally related, and have evolved from a bacterial-like system.
The metabolism of fatty acids occurs in mitochondria (beta-oxidation) and in peroxisomes (alpha-oxidation). The oxidation of long chain fatty acids (> C1 6) occurs in mitochondria while shorter fatty acids (< C1 2) are degraded in peroxisomes. The major products of these pathways are acetyl-CoA and shortened-chain fatty acids that are transported to the Kreb's cycle for energy production. The fatty acids are activated to acyl-CoA by acyl-CoA synthetase (ACS). ACS is present in the cytosol as well as in the mitochondria and microsomes. In the mitochondria, ACS is associated with the ATP-synthase and is part of the electron transport chain. In the peroxisomes, ACS is a separate, soluble protein. In addition to its role in activation of fatty acids, ACS is involved in the biosynthesis of ether phospholipids and in the biosynthesis of cholesterol. In the biosynthesis of ether phospholipids, ACS first activates 2-acyl-glycerols with ATP to form 2-acyl-CoA. The 2-acyl-glycerols are then converted to 1-acyl-glycerols by a pyridoxal-dependent glycerol kinase. The final step in the biosynthesis of ether phospholipids is catalyzed by a specific glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase. In humans there are two genes encoding for glycerol kinase. The gene for the soluble form of ACS (ACSVL) has been identified and sequenced. The gene for the membrane-bound ACS (ACADM) has not been identified. In addition to its role in the biosynthesis of lipids, ACS plays an important role in the activation of drugs and xenobiotics. In the liver, the most extensively studied example is the activation of the anti-viral drug adefovir by ACS. In addition to its role in the activation of drugs, ACS is involved in the biosynthesis of bile acids. In the biosynthesis of bile acids, cholesterol is converted to bile acids by a series of reactions that include the formation of 2-acyl-CoA and the subsequent conversion of 2-acyl-CoA to 2-hydroxyacyl-CoA. The final step in the biosynthesis of bile acids is the conversion of 2-hydroxyacyl-CoA to choloyl-CoA by a specific 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA-dehydrogenase (HCDH). The sequence of reactions involved in the biosynthesis of bile acids are shown in the left panel of Figure 1. In the right panel of Figure 1 is shown a model of the electron transport chain shown with a red box representing the peroxisomes and a blue box representing the mitochondria. The red box represents the electron transport chain while the blue box represents glycolysis. The oxidation of fatty acids to acetyl-CoA is the first step in the Kreb's cycle. In the Kreb's cycle, acetyl-CoA is transported to the mitochondria where it is oxidized to CO2 and H2O. In contrast, in the peroxisomes, acetyl-CoA is transported to the Kreb's cycle where it is converted to Kreb's cycle intermediates such as succinyl-CoA and malate. The major energy source for the heart is from the oxidation of fatty acids. However, under some conditions such as starvation or diabetes, the heart can use glucose as a source of energy. Myocardial fatty acid oxidation is tightly regulated by the concentration of malonyl-CoA, a key regulatory metabolite. Malonyl-CoA is a potent inhibitor of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1). CPT1 is a key regulatory enzyme in the transport of fatty acids into the mitochondria where they are oxidized. In the absence of insulin, the heart uses glucose as its primary energy source. However, under conditions of increased metabolic demand such as exercise or ischemia, the heart increases its use of fatty acids. Myocardial ischemia results in the accumulation of fatty acids in the heart and a decrease in the delivery of oxygen. The accumulation of fatty acids in the heart leads to a decrease in the oxidation of fatty acids and a commensurate increase in the use of glucose. The increased use of glucose as an energy source results in a decrease in the oxidation of glucose and an increase in the production of lactate. The increase in the use of glucose as an energy source occurs because of the accumulation of metabolic intermediates and the decrease in the delivery of oxygen. The accumulation of metabolic intermediates results in an increase in the concentration of acetyl-CoA. The increase in the concentration of acetyl-CoA inhibits the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase. The decrease in the delivery of oxygen results in a decrease in the oxidation of fatty acids and an increase in the oxidation of glucose. The increase in the use of glucose as an energy source occurs because of the accumulation of metabolic intermediates and the decrease in the delivery of oxygen.
The base excision repair (BER) pathway corrects small, non-helix-distorting DNA lesions that are generated by oxidation, alkylation, deamination, and depurination. The first step in the repair of these lesions is the removal of the damaged base by a DNA glycosylase. The resulting abasic site is then repaired by one of two pathways. In the short-patch BER pathway, the abasic site is recognized and cleaved by an AP endonuclease, producing a single-stranded DNA break that is then repaired by DNA PolI. In the long-patch BER pathway, the lesion is recognized by DNA PolI and a DNA ligase are involved. The DNA glycosylases that remove oxidized bases in the BER pathway are human NEIL1, NEIL2, and OGG1, and these enzymes are similar in sequence and structure to the Escherichia coli DNA glycosylase Nei. Like Nei, these glycosylases flip their damaged base out of the DNA helix and cleave the DNA backbone at the abasic site, creating a single-stranded DNA break. Human OGG1 excises 8-oxoguanine, a common oxidative DNA lesion, and its E. coli counterpart, MutM, also excises 8-oxoguanine. NEIL1 and NEIL2 are oxidized base-specific DNA glycosylases that excise a variety of oxidized bases, including thymine glycol, 5-hydroxyuracil, 5-hydroxycytosine, and dihydrouracil. In addition to removing damaged bases, DNA glycosylases that remove damaged bases induce a DNA strand break in the vicinity of the lesion to create a substrate for the repair enzymes. NEIL1, for example, cleaves the DNA strand at the base lesion, producing a 3-base 5 'overhang that is then repaired by the BER pathway. If the DNA strand break is not repaired, it will block replication. PARP-1, an enzyme involved in the detection and repair of DNA damage, is activated by DNA strand breaks to catalyze the synthesis of poly (ADP-ribose) using NAD + as a substrate. The addition of poly (ADP-ribose) to target proteins by PARP-1, including PARP-3 and -lline, recruits them to the site of DNA damage. The poly (ADP-ribose) chains serve as a scaffold to hold other repair enzymes in close proximity, enhance their catalytic activity, and protect the DNA strand from degradation.
DNA damage that affects a gene that has been actively transcribed can be repaired by the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway. The repair of this type of damage occurs in a complex manner and requires the coordinated action of over 2 0 different proteins. The first step in the repair process is the recognition of the damage by the xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) proteins. The damaged DNA is then unwound by the TFIIH complex, and the damaged strand is excised in a dual incision reaction that involves the action of the ERCC1 / XPF and XPG endonucleases. The remaining gap is filled by the DNA polymerases δ and / or ε and then ligated by the DNA ligase I or III.
The primary role of the DNA polymerase delta complex is to replicate the genome during DNA replication and to repair damage to DNA. The complex is composed of a catalytic subunit (Pol3) and five subunits that are required for the activity but are not part of the complex itself. The Pol3 subunit contains the polymerase and 3 '-5'exonuclease activities that are responsible for the replication of the genome. The other subunits are encoded by the POL3 0, POL3 1, and POL3 2 genes. The Pol3 catalytic subunit and the POL3 2 subunit are essential for cell viability. The Pol3 1 subunit is not essential for cell viability but is required for efficient DNA replication in vivo and for the stability of the genome. The five-subunit complex is required for DNA replication in vitro and is also required for mismatch repair. The complex is localized to the nucleus in the G1 phase of the cell cycle but is exported to the cytoplasm during mitosis where it is not required for DNA replication. The localization and activity of the DNA polymerase delta complex is regulated by the cell cycle checkpoint kinase Cdc5Cds1 (chk1). The activity of the complex is also regulated by the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) which acts as a processivity factor and also interacts with the polymerase subunit.
Homologous recombination (HR) is a fundamental mechanism of DNA repair that uses the information in homologous chromosomes or in the sister chromatids as a template to repair breaks in DNA. The central step of HR is the formation of a D-loop structure in which the 3 'end of the single stranded DNA is aligned with the homologous sequence in the double stranded DNA template. The invading strand is then extended by DNA synthesis using the homologous sequence as a template. The D-loop can also be converted into a double Holliday Junction (HJ) structure, in which the two homologous duplexes are joined together. The resolution of HJs and other recombination intermediates is essential for the completion of HR and requires specific endonucleases that cleave the DNA in a highly sequence-specific manner. One of the key proteins that plays a central role in the regulation of HR is the breast cancer associated protein BRCA2. BRCA2 stimulates the activity of the HJ resolvase MUS8 1-EME1 and also directly interacts with the HJ resolvase SLX4. Another protein involved in the regulation of HR is the breast cancer associated protein BRCA1. BRCA1 interacts with the RAD5 1 recombinase and stimulates the formation of the RAD5 1 nucleoprotein filament, the key HR intermediate, which is required for the search for homology and for the subsequent steps of HR. The anti-recombinase BCCIP1interacts with RAD5 1 and prevents its nucleoprotein filament formation. The role of the tumor suppressors BRCA2 and BRCA1 in the regulation of HR is one of the key factors determining the susceptibility of individuals to breast and ovarian cancer.
p38 MAPKs are members of the MAPK family that are activated by a variety of environmental stresses and inflammatory signals. Stress signals are delivered by members of small GTPases of the Rho family (Rac, Rho, Cdc42). Inflammatory signals are delivered by members of the TNF receptor and Toll-like receptor gene families. Stress and inflammatory signals are delivered by members of the TRAF family. The activation of p38 MAPKs is transient, with a half-life of a few minutes. The key regulatory step is the phosphorylation of a threonine and a tyrosine residue in the p38 MAPK activation loop. There are four p38 MAPKs in man, p38-I, p38-II, p38-III and p38-V, which are encoded by four distinct genes. The activities of the p38 MAPKs are differentially regulated by the upstream kinases and are differentially inhibited by the p38 MAPK phosphatases. The p38-I and p38-II isoforms are activated by inflammatory signals and are inhibited by the p38 MAPK phosphatase-1. The p38-III and p38-V isoforms are activated by stress signals and are not inhibited by p38 MAPK phosphatase-1. The p38-III isoforms are activated by RhoA and are inhibited by p38 MAPK phosphatase-1. The activity of the p38-I and p38-II isoforms is increased by the coactivator ARA-GTP and is inhibited by filamin. The activity of the p38-III isoforms is increased by calcineurin and is inhibited by filamin. The clinical importance of the p38 MAPKs is demonstrated by the involvement of several of the genes in cancer and other diseases.
The epidermal growth factor (EGF) peptide induces cellular proliferation and differentiation in a variety of cell types. The EGF receptor (ERBB1) is a member of a family of four closely related proteins (EGFR / ERBB1, ERBB2, ERBB3 and ERBB4) that bind EGF and related peptides. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED) < / FREETEXT > < / ABSTRACT > ▃
Nitric oxide (NO), prostacyclin (PGI) and the E-series prostaglandins (PGE, PGE, and PGF) inhibit platelet activation via the G-protein coupled receptors PAR1 and EP, respectively. These receptors stimulate the production of cGMP via nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and the guanylate cyclase. The action of cGMP in turn activates cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) which inhibits platelet activation. In addition to this inhibitory pathway, PGI and NO stimulate cAMP production via prostacyclin and NO-stimulated adenylate cyclase, respectively. This pathway contributes significantly to the inhibitory activity of these agents. The action of cAMP is mediated by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). In contrast to the inhibitory pathways, platelet activation by ADP and thrombin is enhanced by cAMP. This effect is mediated by the cAMP-dependent Epac1, but not by the cAMP-dependent PKA. The action of Epac1 is independent of phosphorylation and involves the activation of the small GTPase Rap1.
The role of CCRs in leukocyte trafficking is highlighted in part 1--Inflammation is a complex response to infection that requires communication between different classes of immune cells, including lymphocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils. Different classes of leukocytes respond to different stimuli in different phases of inflammation. Macrophages and neutrophils respond to bacterial infection and inflammation, while helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells respond to antigens presented by antigen-presenting cells such as macrophages and neutrophils. In the initial phase of inflammation, the complement cascade and the pentraxin family of proteins activate macrophages to secrete the proinflammatory cytokines IL-1, IL-6 and TNF. IL-1 and TNF cause fever through alteration of the metabolism of the liver, and stimulate the proliferation and activation of neutrophils. T cells and macrophages also express IL-2 and IL-2 receptor to further stimulate their proliferation and activation. Macrophages and neutrophils secrete chemokines that recruit other leukocytes to the site of inflammation. Chemokines can be classified into two major groups based on their cysteine residues and shape forwarding their movement. The C-X-C chemokines are induced by IFN-gamma and are chemotactic primarily toward neutrophils, while the C-C chemokines are chemotactic toward monocytes, macrophages, and T cells. The expression of different CCRs by different leukocyte classes plays an important role in the migration and homing of leukocytes during inflammation. For example, CCR5 is important for the migration of macrophages and T cells to sites of inflammation, while the expression of CCR7 is important for the homing of T cells and macrophages to the lymph nodes.
The chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 are important mediators of cell migration in response to inflammatory signals. They are also used by HIV to enter cells and so are important therapeutic targets. As with other GPCRs, chemokine receptor signaling is regulated by GPCR kinases (GRKs) that phosphorylate the receptor, causing the binding of arrestin proteins that terminate signaling. One of the key steps in chemokine receptor signaling is the activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB. This is accomplished by a G protein-independent mechanism that involves the protein kinase AKT and the Dbl-related guanine nucleotide exchange factor Vav. The activation of NF-kappaB by chemokine receptors may be involved in the role of these receptors in inflammation and HIV infection.
The cell cycle is regulated by the interplay of cyclins which are expressed in a specific phase of the cell cycle and by cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) which are expressed in a specific phase of the cell cycle. The activity of the cdks is regulated by association with various cyclins and by the phosphorylation state of the cdk subunits. The G1 / S transition is regulated by the association of cyclin D1 with the CDK4 or CDK6 proteins. The cyclin D1-CDK4 / 6 complex phosphorylates the tumor suppressor Rb which leads to a change in the chromatin structure and activation of genes required for S phase entry. The cyclin E-cdk2 complex is required for progression through the G1 / S transition and also for the initiation of DNA replication. The cyclin A-cdk2 complex is involved in the S phase transition and in the progression of the DNA replication. The cyclin B-cdc2 complex is involved in the G2 / M transition and in the progression of mitosis.
The cell cycle transition from G1 to S phase is a key regulatory point in the cell cycle. This transition is regulated by the checkpoint kinase cdk2 that activates the G1 to S transition when it is bound to cyclin E. Skp1, Cul1, and F-box protein complexes (SCF) are a class of ubiquitin ligases that target proteins for proteolytic degradation in a specific sequence-dependent manner. One of the key targets of the SCF complex is the cell cycle regulator cyclin E. The F-box protein that binds to the SCF complex is Skp2. Skp2 binds to cyclin E when it is bound to the SCF complex, and targets cyclin E for degradation by the proteosome. The level of Skp2 oscillates in the cell, increasing as the level of Skp2 decreases. The level of Skp2 determines whether cyclin E will be degraded at the G1 to S transition or will be maintained at high levels to drive the cell cycle through the G1 / S transition. Factors that increase the level of Skp2 include cytokine stimulation, contact inhibition, and serum withdrawal.
The cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are a family of proteins that act as master regulators of the cell cycle, controlling the passage of the cell cycle through specific cell cycle checkpoints. The CDKs are regulated by association with cyclins, which are expressed in a cell cycle dependent manner. There are two families of cyclins associated with CDK activity: the cyclins that are involved in checkpoint control (cyclins A, B, D and E) and the cyclins that are involved in cell cycle progression (cyclins A and B). The cyclins combine with the CDK to form active kinases, phosphorylating downstream targets to drive the cell through specific phases of the cell cycle. The checkpoint-associated cyclins (A and B) are degraded at the metaphase-anaphase transition, allowing the CDK-cyclin complexes to participate in the next cell cycle phase. The expression of the cyclins is regulated by the checkpoint kinases Chk1 and Chk2, which phosphorylate the cyclins in response to DNA damage, causing them to degrade at the same rate as the checkpoint kinases. The CDK inhibitors (CDKIs) are a group of proteins that interact with the CDKs to regulate their activity. The CDKIs are further divided into two groups based on their function and expression period: the INK4 inhibitors (including p53) and the Kis proteins (including p21 and p73). The INK4 proteins inhibit the activity of the CDKs associated with cell cycle progression (CDK4 and CDK6), blocking the transition from G1 to S phase. The Kis proteins (including p21 and p73) inhibit the activity of the cyclin E-CDK2 complex, blocking the transition from G1 to S phase. The expression of the Kis proteins is induced by DNA damage, inhibiting the progression of the cell cycle to prevent further mutation.
The activity of the tumor suppressor protein p5 3 is regulated by a variety of post-translational modifications that include phosphorylation, acetylation, methylation, and ubiquitination. The importance of p5 3 protein modification for its function as a tumor suppressor has been demonstrated by the numerous cancer-associated mutations found in the p5 3 gene. The importance of p5 3 ubiquitination in the control of cell cycle progression and apoptosis is illustrated by the fact that the E3 ubiquitin ligase that promotes p5 3 degradation is MDM2. MDM2 binds to the transcriptional activation domain of p5 3 and promotes the ubiquitination of p5 3. MDM2 also possesses ubiquitin ligase activity and can self-ubiquitinate. The RING finger domain of MDM2 is essential for both its E3 ligase activity and its self-ubiquitination. The crystal structure of MDM2 bound to a peptide representing the transactivation domain of p5 3 has provided important insights into the molecular basis of substrate recognition by an E3 ligase. The MDM2-p5 3 complex reveals that MDM2 has a single substrate binding cleft that can accommodate a peptide from p5 3. The structure also suggests that additional contacts between MDM2 and p5 3 may contribute to the high affinity and specificity of the MDM2-p5 3 interaction. The regulation of the MDM2-p5 3 interaction is a key determinant of p5 3 stability and, ultimately, cell fate. The MDM2 protein itself is a transcriptional target of p5 3, forming a negative feedback loop that serves to attenuate the p5 3 response to stress signals such as DNA damage. Several proteins interact with MDM2 to regulate its E3 ligase activity and, as a result, the level and activity of p5 3. The INK4a / ARF locus encodes two unrelated tumor suppressors, p1 6 (INK4a) and ARF, which are both involved in the regulation of MDM2. The INK4a protein inhibits the activity of the cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and the related CDK6, blocking the phosphorylation of the Rb protein and, consequently, the activation of E2F transcription factors and the transcription of genes required for progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle. The MDM2 protein is a target of the Ras-MAPK pathway activator, p38. MDM2 is phosphorylated by p38 at serine residue 1 6 6 within the MDM2 acidic domain. MDM2 phosphorylated at serine 1 6 6 is no longer able to promote the ubiquitination or degradation of p5 3. Instead, MDM2 phosphorylated at serine 1 6 6 is no longer able to shuttle p5 3 to the cytoplasm, but is able to promote the nuclear export of p5 3. The phosphorylation of MDM2 at serine 1 6 6 induced by stress signals such as DNA damage is a key regulatory step in the stabilization and activation of p5 3.
The packaging of extracellular material into vesicles, exosomes for example, is a general feature of eukaryotic cells. Exosomes are released by cells into the extracellular environment and are found in all body fluids. They are thought to play a role in cell to cell communication and contain a variety of biologically active molecules. The biogenesis of exosomes requires the multivesicular body (MVB) pathway, which also transports membrane proteins from the Golgi to the plasma membrane. The MVB is a late endosome-like structure formed by the invagination of the cytoplasmic membrane to form a vesicle which is released as an exosome in the extracellular space. The formation of the MVB requires the coordinated action of several proteins, including the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT). The ESCRT machinery consists of four complexes (ESCRT-0, -I, -II and -III) and several associated factors. The ESCRT-0 complex contains ubiquitin binding activity and localizes to the endosomal membrane. The ESCRT-I complex consists of two proteins, hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (HRS or Vps2 7) and signal-transducing adaptor molecule (STAM). Both proteins bind to ubiquitin and are required for the formation of the MVB. The ESCRT-I complex recruits the ESCRT-II complex to the membrane. The ESCRT-II complex consists of the proteins TSG1 0 1 and Vps2 2 / 2 5. The ESCRT-III complex consists of proteins such as vacuolar protein sorting 3 (VPS33) and is involved in the membrane fission reaction. The final step in the formation of exosomes is the release of exosomes from the cell. This is probably mediated by the ATPase VPS34. Exosomes contain a variety of proteins derived from the plasma membrane and intracellular vesicles. Some of these proteins are specific for exosomes and are likely to be involved in their formation or release. For example, tissue factor, a plasma membrane protein, is present in exosomes derived from tumor cells. In addition to tissue factor, tumor exosomes also contain the MHC I and II complexes and are potent activators of T cells. Other proteins found in exosomes include the transferrin receptor, proteases and protease inhibitors. The presence of these factors suggests that exosomes may play a role in the modulation of immune responses and may be involved in the spread of transformed cells.
The essential role of the peroxisome in cellular metabolism is to metabolize fatty acids, amino acids, and other metabolites. The peroxisome is also involved in the biosynthesis of ether lipids, bile acids, and the biosynthesis of some prostaglandins and leukotrienes. In humans, defects in peroxisome function result in the peroxisome biogenesis disorders, which include the lethal Zellweger syndrome and the milder single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies. The proteins required for peroxisome biogenesis are encoded by PEX genes, which were identified by their requirement for peroxisome formation to occur in yeast. The products of the PEX genes are involved in the formation of the peroxisome membrane, matrix protein import, and metabolism of lipids and metabolites in the peroxisome. Most of the PEX genes have yeast and mammalian orthologs, indicating that the mechanisms of peroxisome formation are highly conserved. A key step in the assembly of the peroxisome is the import of proteins from the cytosol into the peroxisome. Most peroxisomal matrix proteins are translated as precursors with N-terminal targeting sequences that bind the import receptor, Pex5p, at the C-terminus and the receptor-cargo complex is then imported into the peroxisome by a docking / translocation complex containing the integral membrane proteins Pex3p and Pex1 4p. The matrix proteins are then proteolytically processed and translocated into the peroxisome via the peroxisomal translocon, a complex of proteins including Pex1 3p and Pex1 6p. Some peroxisomal matrix proteins, like catalase, are translated alone and are imported post-translationally into the peroxisome. The translation of these proteins requires the assistance of a translation-promoting factor, PTS1-binding protein, Pex1 2p. Other proteins, like the acyl-CoA oxidase, are only synthesized as part of a larger precursor protein containing a PTS1 sequence. The PTS1 is a conserved tripeptide that is recognized and bound by the import receptor Pex5p. Other proteins, like the bifunctional enzyme and the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, are only translated as a larger precursor protein and are then proteolytically cleaved by a protease complex in the peroxisome to release the mature protein. The PTS-binding protein, Pex1 4p, is required for both PTS1- and PTS2-mediated protein import. The cycling of the PTS receptors, Pex5p and Pex7p, between the cytosol and peroxisome is essential for peroxisomal protein import. The cycling of the PTS receptors is regulated by the ubiquitin-like protein, Pex5p, and the ubiquitin-like protein, Pex2 0p, and their homologs in mammals, Nedd8 and Poverty, respectively. The targeting of proteins into the peroxisome requires energy, the peroxisomal membrane and associated proteins, and a cycling Pex5p. The energy is provided by the E1 (Aconitase) and E2 (Pex7p) enzymes of the ubiquitin-activating / -conjugating system. The ATP-dependent ubiquitination of Pex5p appears to be required for protein import into the peroxisome.
The inflammatory cytokine IL-1 plays a key role in a number of inflammatory conditions and also contributes to septic shock. The biological activities of IL-1 are mediated by two receptors, IL-1R1 and IL-1R2. The IL-1R1 receptor binds IL-1 directly, but requires the IL-1RAcP to transduce a signal. In contrast, the IL-1R2 protein binds IL-1 but does not transduce a signal on its own. In addition to signaling inflammation, IL-1 plays a role in the differentiation of T cells. T helper cells can be subdivided into Th1 and Th2 cells, distinguished by the cytokines they produce. The induction of IL-1 by microbial agents plays a key role in inducing the Th2 response, in part through activation of NF-kB. The role of IL-1 in septic shock may be in inducing the production of IL-4 by T cells, leading to the development of an antibody response and a Th2 response.
This is a group of genes that are involved in the conversion of ATP to cAMP. The key step in this pathway is the activation of AC by G-protein coupled receptors that stimulate the G-protein Gs. The most well-known activator of AC is the G-protein coupled receptor for adrenaline and noradrenaline, the beta-adrenergic receptor. Other GPCRs that stimulate AC via Gs are the prostaglandin receptor, the prostacyclin receptor and the adenosine receptor. In addition to the Gs-mediated pathway, AC can also be stimulated by the G-protein coupled receptor for somatostatin, the formyl peptide receptor and the calcium-sensing receptor. There are several AC isoforms that are differentially expressed in tissues. AC1, AC3 and AC5 are stimulated by calcium, while AC6 and AC8 are not. The activity of AC9 has not yet been determined. The activity of AC is also affected by the concentration of G-protein subunits in the membrane. If the concentration of G-protein subunits is high, then the activity of AC is inhibited. In vivo this is probably achieved via the action of GTPase activating proteins (GAPs). Once activated, AC catalyses the formation of cAMP from ATP. The intracellular concentration of cAMP is governed by the balance of synthesis by AC and degradation by phosphodiesterase. cAMP is a key signalling molecule and is bound by the regulatory subunit of protein kinase A. The activity of protein kinase A is regulated by the concentration of cAMP and also the concentration of the kinase itself. The activity of protein kinase A is also affected by the concentration of ATP. If the concentration of ATP is high, then the activity of protein kinase A is inhibited via the action of the kinase auto-phosphorylation.
Wnt family members are secreted glycoproteins who bind to cell surface receptors such as Frizzled. Wnt members can play a role in the expression of many genes by interacting with multiple pathways. The Wnt family member Wnt-1 plays a role in the expression of frizzled-2 and frizzled-3. The Wnt-frizzled interaction leads to the activation of disheveled (DSH) proteins. The activation of DSH leads to the inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3). Wnt-1 also leads to the activation of NF-AT-3 via the kinase CKIepsilon. The activation of NF-AT-3 leads to the expression of cyclin D and the activation of the cyclin dependent kinase CDK4. Wnt-1 also plays a role in the expression of the matrix metalloprotease MMP-7. Wnt-1 plays a role in the expression of MMP-7 via the beta-catenin dependent pathway. Wnt-1 also plays a role in the expression of c-Myc via the activation of LEF-1. The activation of c-Myc leads to the expression of the MYC / Max complex. The MYC / Max complex activates the expression of the transferrin receptor. Transferrin plays a role in iron uptake by cells.
Presenilin-1 (PS1) and nicastrin are required for gamma-secretase activity, which cleaves amyloid precursor protein (APP) and releases amyloid beta-peptide, a suspected causative agent in Alzheimers disease. Presenilin is also required for Notch signaling and is a component of gamma-secretase. The active gamma-secretase complex includes PS-1, nicastrin, aph-1 and pen-2. Notch is a transmembrane protein with a large N-terminal extracellular domain and a single transmembrane domain. Binding of Delta or Jagged ligands to Notch in the transmembrane region triggers cleavage of Notch by a metalloprotease tumor necrosis factor alpha-converting enzyme (TACE). This cleaves Notch at site 1, which is followed by cleavage by gamma-secretase at site 2. The resulting Notch intracellular domain (NICD) is released from the membrane and enters the nucleus to participate in transcriptional regulation. Presenilin is required for gamma-secretase activity and is also a component of gamma-secretase. Presenilin contains eight transmembrane domains and has been predicted to enter the membrane once, but recent data indicate that Presenilin actually enter the membrane twice. Presenilin mutations that cause Alzheimer's disease alter residues in the sixth transmembrane domain of Presenilin. These mutations appear to alter the structure of the transmembrane domain and increase the population of Presenilin molecules that enter the membrane twice. The role of nicastrin in gamma-secretase activity is not yet known. Aph-1 is a multi-transmembrane domain protein that is also required for gamma-secretase activity. It appears to be a component of the gamma-secretase complex, but does not appear to be a substrate for gamma-secretase. The transmembrane domain of Notch also appears to play a role in gamma-secretase cleavage of Notch. Jagged and Delta bind to Notch in the transmembrane region, triggering cleavage by gamma-secretase. Presenilin appears to enter the membrane twice, so that two molecules of Presenilin are present in the gamma-secretase complex that cleaves Notch.
The morphogenic signaling molecule Hedgehog plays a critical role in development. Disruption of Hedgehog signaling leads to developmental defects and cancer. The mature Hedgehog protein is secreted from cells and binds to receptors on the cell surface. One of the receptors for Hedgehog is Patched (PTC). In the absence of Hedgehog, PTC functions as a tumor suppressor by inhibiting the Hedgehog signaling pathway. Hedgehog binds to PTC, releasing it from inhibition by the protein Supressor of Fused (SUFU). Hedgehog binding also relieves inhibition of the Gli family of transcriptional activators by the proteasome. Activated Gli proteins translocate into the nucleus to activate transcription. Hedgehog signaling is opposed by the protein kinase PKA, which phosphorylates the Hedgehog receptor complex and blocks Hedgehog signaling. Protein kinase C may also play a role in Hedgehog signaling by regulating the localization of Hedgehog proteins. Ubiquitylation and proteolytic degradation of Hedgehog plays a key role in the regulation of Hedgehog signaling. The F-box / WD repeat-containing protein Slimb targets Hedgehog for ubiquitylation and degradation by the proteasome. The F-box protein Slimb interacts with the serine / threonine kinase CK1 and the scaffolding protein Supernumerary limbs (Slb) to recruit Hedgehog for phosphorylation by CK1 and subsequent ubiquitylation by the SCF Slimb complex. Hedgehog signaling is opposed by the protein phosphatase PP2A. Hedgehog may also play a role in the methylation of histones and chromatin structure to regulate gene expression.
The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily includes many members with distinct functions including the regulation of development, proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. The activities of TGF-beta family members are regulated by complex and coordinated signaling pathways that include both canonical and non-canonical TGF-beta signaling pathways. The TGF-beta receptor complex includes type 1 and type 2 subunits, which are serine-threonine kinases and are activated by ligand binding. TGF-beta ligands bind initially to the type 2 receptor, which is believed to be a prereceptor for the TGF-beta ligands. The type 1 receptor is recruited to the ligand-receptor complex upon binding of the TGF-beta ligand and is then phosphorylated by the type 2 receptor. The type 1 receptor phosphorylates the TGF-beta receptor-associated SMAD proteins, SMAD2 and SMAD3, which are then bound by the adaptor protein SARA (SMAD Anchor for Receptor Activation). SARA binds to the TGF-beta receptor complex and brings the SMAD proteins into close proximity of the type 1 receptor kinase. The interaction of SARA and SMAD2 / 3 with the TGF-beta receptor complex facilitates the phosphorylation of SMAD2 and SMAD3 by the type 1 receptor kinase. The phosphorylated SMAD2 and SMAD3 proteins bind to the common mediator SMAD, SMAD4, and are transported into the nucleus to regulate transcription. TGF-beta signaling is attenuated by several mechanisms, including the phosphorylation of SMAD2 and SMAD3 by the TGF-beta activated kinase, TAK1 (TGF-beta activated kinase 1), which leads to their association with the E3 ubiquitin ligase, SCF (SMURF1), targeting them for degradation by the proteosome. TGF-beta signaling can also be repressed by the inhibitory SMADs, SMAD6 and SMAD7, which bind to the TGF-beta receptor complex and block the phosphorylation of SMAD2 and SMAD3. SMAD6 and SMAD7 also interact with the transcriptional corepressor proteins groucho and histone deacetylase to repress transcription. TGF-beta signaling is also inhibited by the SnoN protein, which is upregulated by TGF-beta signaling and binds to the TGF-beta receptor complex to block interaction of the SMAD2 and SMAD3 with the transcriptional machinery. TGF-beta signaling is also repressed by the p45 protein, which interacts with the TGF-beta receptor complex to block phosphorylation of SMAD2 and SMAD3. In addition to regulating the SMAD signaling pathway, TGF-beta signaling affects other signaling pathways including the MAPK pathways and NF-kB.
The secreted protein semaphorin III (also called collapsin) induces growth cone collapse in response neurons in vitro. Semaphorin III is expressed in the developing nervous system and may act as a repellent to guide neuronal projections. The receptor for semaphorin III is a complex of neuropilin and the Met tyrosine kinase. Binding of semaphorin III to the receptor complex activates ras-mediated signaling and causes a reduction in F-actin content in the growth cone. Activated Met also signals through PI3 kinase to induce neurite outgrowth. Cofilin, an actin binding protein, is inactivated by phosphorylation at threonine by ck-src to prevent its actin binding activity and may be a target of signal transduction by Met and semaphorin III to cause growth cone collapse. Signaling by the plexin component of the semaphorin III receptor complex is also required for effective signaling by semaphorin III. The cytoplasmic domain of plexin contains a putative GTPase activating protein (GAP) domain that is required for signaling by semaphorin III. The GAP domain may be required to stimulate the GTPase activity of a G protein required for signaling by Met or another G protein. Downstream effectors of the plexin domain include the small G protein Rac1 and the p21 (RAC1) -activated kinase PAK. PAK is required for effective signaling by semaphorin III and is involved in the regulation of cofilin activity. Activation of PAK may prevent phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM kinase to block its actin depolymerizing activity. In addition to regulating cytoskeletal structure, signaling by Met and plexin can also induce cellular proliferation and may play a role in oncogenesis.
The activation of platelets requires the release of platelet-dense core granules toward the plasma membrane to release ADP and serotonin, two of the most potent endogenous platelet inhibitors of platelet aggregation. The release of these platelet-dense core granules is stimulated by thrombin and is enhanced by the presence of epinephrine and ADP. The activation of the protease-activated receptors PAR1 and PAR4 by thrombin is essential for platelet activation and the release of platelet-dense core granules. The release of platelet-dense core granules releases adenosine diphosphate (ADP), which activates additional platelets, and 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), which is a potent vasoconstrictor and platelet activator. The activation of platelet-dense core granules also releases arachidonic acid, which is converted to thromboxane A2 by prostaglandin H synthase in platelets. thromboxane A2 is a potent vasoconstrictor and platelet activator. The activation of PAR1 and PAR4 by thrombin releases ADP, which further activates platelets and contributes to the amplification of platelet activation. The release of ADP, 5-HT and arachidonic acid activate the intrinsic pathway of coagulation, resulting in the formation of a fibrin clot. The activation of protein C by thrombin inactivates the clotting cascade and contributes to the termination of the clotting response.
Integrins are cell surface receptors that mediate interactions between cells and their surrounding extracellular matrix. The integrin family of proteins consists of > 1 5 different subunits that combine to form > 1 5 0 distinct receptors. Integrins do not themselves possess a transmembrane domain or a cytoplasmic domain, but are anchored to the cell surface by a variety of proteins including, but not limited to, transmembrane proteins, Ig-like proteins and proteoglycans. The interaction of cells with the extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a critical role in a number of cellular processes, including cell shape change, migration, proliferation and survival. Integrins do not possess a cytoplasmic domain that transduces a signal in response to ligand binding, but rely on association with other proteins to transmit signals. Integrins do, however, communicate signals back into the cell, primarily through the cytoplasmic domain of the integrin heterodimer's interaction with proteins in the focal adhesion complex. The focal adhesion complex contains > 1 0 different proteins and is involved in integrin-mediated signal transduction (Fig. 10). In addition to playing a role in cellular adhesion, the focal adhesion complex is involved in cellular signaling events including activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), paxillin, and src. Src is involved in the phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domains of the integrin subunits that anchor the ECM to the actin cytoskeleton, and also phosphorylates growth factor receptors to provide a costimulatory signal in cellular proliferation. Growth factor receptors in turn activate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, also in part involving FAK and paxillin. The importance of the focal adhesion complex in cellular signaling has been demonstrated through the use of peptides derived from the integrin cytoplasmic domain. The 440 amino acid cytoplasmic domain of the alphav integrin subunit is sufficient to induce cellular transformation and FAK phosphorylation. The 11 amino acid sequence RGD found in many ECM proteins is essential for integrin function and is required for focal adhesion complex formation and cellular signaling. The RGD sequence interacts with the extracellular domain of the integrin to mediate its function. In addition to the RGD sequence, the alphav integrin subunit contains a WYG motif that is also required for integrin function. The WYG motif is required for integrin-mediated FAK phosphorylation, but not focal adhesion complex formation. In addition to the WYG motif, the alphav integrin subunit contains a threonine residue at position 39 that is substituted for an alanine in the other integrin alpha subunits. This threonine is required for the alphav integrin to function in cellular transformation and activation. In addition to the WYG and RGD sequences, the cytoplasmic domain of the alphav integrin also contains a tyrosine residue that is phosphorylated during cellular transformation. Mutation of this tyrosine to phenylalanine results in a loss of tyrosine phosphorylation but does not affect cellular transformation. The tyrosine phosphorylation of the alphav integrin does not appear to play a role in FAK phosphorylation or focal adhesion complex formation. The importance of the alphav integrin in cellular signaling has been demonstrated through the use of inhibitory antibodies. The alphav integrin is expressed on a variety of cells in the body, but is most abundant on cells in the vascular wall and in the lung. In addition to playing a role in cellular adhesion, the alphav integrin is a receptor for the ECM protein fibronectin. Interaction of the alphav integrin with fibronectin activates cellular signaling events similar to that of the RGD containing ECM ligands.
Interactions between cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM) are important for the function and structure of tissues. Cells in the body are attached to specific matrix proteins on their surface through a variety of cell surface receptors, the integrins. Integrins are a family of cell surface receptors that bind to specific matrix proteins and also interact with other cell surface receptors to transmit signals into the cell in response to matrix proteins. There are at least 2 4 different integrin heterodimers formed from the combination of 1 of 1 8α (integrin subunit alpha) and 10β (integrin subunit beta) subunits that combine to form at least 1 5 different cell surface receptors that bind to different subsets of matrix proteins. The 1 7β subunits are able to dimerize with at least 8different α subunits to form receptors for different matrix proteins. The 18α subunits are not involved in binding to matrix proteins but are involved in signalling roles. The combination of α and β subunits determines the affinity and specificity of the integrin for its ligands. For example, the α1β1 integrin binds to collagen and the α2β1 integrin binds to the extracellular matrix proteins fibronectin and laminin. The α3β1 integrin binds to both collagen and laminin and the α5β1 integrin binds to both fibronectin and fibrin. The α6β1 integrin binds to both laminin and fibronectin. The α4β1 integrin binds to both very-large-fragment (VLF) and fragment B of fibronectin. The αvβ1 integrin binds to the matrix proteins collagen and fibronectin, and the αvβ3 integrin binds to vitronectin. The αvβ5 integrin does not bind to any of the known matrix proteins but is a receptor for the fibronectin fragment containing RGD. The GPIb-V-IX complex binds to thrombin activated platelets and to the matrix protein thrombospondin.
Interactions between T cells and antigen-presenting cells are of fundamental importance for the generation of specific immune responses. T cell receptors (TCRs) bind to specific peptide antigens in the groove of MHC-II molecules on the surface of antigen-presenting cells. The interaction between TCRs and MHC-peptide complexes is necessary for the activation of T cells, but is not sufficient. T cell activation also requires additional co-stimulatory signals provided by antigen-presenting cells. T cell activation is initiated by recognition of antigen by the T cell receptor (TCR), but the activation of a T cell requires additional co-stimulatory signals between T cells and antigen-presenting cells. The CD28 receptor expressed on T cells binds to CD80 or CD86 expressed on antigen-presenting cells, inducing T cell activation. CD28 activates the PI3K / Akt pathway and increases expression of the adhesion molecule LFA-1, promoting T cell interaction with antigen-presenting cells. T cell activation is also regulated by other co-stimulatory signals. The interaction of CTLA-4 with B7 proteins silences T cell activation during the later stages of an immune response. The CD45 protein tyrosine phosphatase dephosphorylates TCR signaling components, terminating T cell activation. The CD45 and CD28 proteins are phosphorylated on tyrosine residues during T cell activation, and so provide attractive targets for regulation of T cell activation by phosphorylation.
Epithelia form a selective permeability barrier that restricts the free diffusion of solutes and macromolecules between the apical and basolateral plasma membrane domains of cells. The formation of cell-cell adhesions in epithelial cells is associated with the localized concentration of proteins in specialized regions of the plasma membrane, the adherens junctions. Nest-to-nectin adhesion complexes are formed through interactions between the extracellular domains of cadherins, a family of adhesion molecules with a conserved structure, and the actin cytoskeleton. The formation of E-cadherin based adhesions results in the local activation of the Rho family of GTPases (Rac, Rho and Cdc42), and the associated formation of actin-based structures such as filopodia, lamellipodia and stress fibers. Rac and Cdc42 promote the formation of lamellipodia and filopodia, respectively, while Rho promotes the formation of stress fibers. The nectin-afadin adhesion system also interacts with the actin cytoskeleton through a different set of proteins. Nectin is an adhesion molecule in the Ig gene family that binds afadin, an actin-binding protein. The interaction of nectin with afadin creates a molecular link between the actin cytoskeleton and membranes. In addition to acting as a molecular scaffold, afadin has been suggested to act as a signaling molecule. The tyrosine kinase p600 (Cas-Br-tre) is recruited to the nectin-based adhesion sites through its interaction with afadin. Paxillin is also recruited to these sites through its interaction with both p600 and actin. The tyrosine phosphorylation of nectin, afadin, and paxillin may serve to regulate the formation and / or turnover of cell-cell adhesions.
Tight junctions restrict the movement of ions and molecules across epithelial cell layers. Adhesive junctions between epithelial cells and the actin cytoskeleton further restrict movement of cells. The combined action of these junctions helps to create a selectively permeable barrier to solutes in the paracellular space. Epithelial cells in culture lose their tight junctions when deprived of calcium, and this can be reversed by the addition of calcium. The adherens junction is a belt-like structure along the cell membrane that is associated with the actin cytoskeleton. The cadherins that are involved in the formation of the adherens junction are calcium-dependent adhesion molecules. The catenins that are associated with the cadherins are also calcium-dependent adhesion molecules. The nectin-like proteins and tricellulin are three proteins that participate in tight junction formation. The proteins in the tight junction complex include claudins, occludins and JAMs (junction adhesion molecules). The claudins are proteins in the tight junction that create the barrier properties of the junction. The proteins in the tight junction also regulate passage of ions and molecules across the junction. The actin cytoskeleton plays a key role in the formation and function of epithelial tight junctions. The actin cytoskeleton is involved in the formation of tight junctions, and actin is recruited to the zonula adherens during junction formation. The cortactin protein helps maintain the actin cytoskeleton in a dynamic state prior to tight junction formation. The cortactin protein also interacts with the adherens junction protein, catenin. The motor protein myosin also plays a key role in tight junction formation. Phosphorylation of myosin light chain by myosin light chain kinase reduces the barrier function of the junction. The activity of the myosin light chain kinase in turn is regulated by the GTPase RhoA and the rho-associated kinase. The activity of the myosin light chain kinase increases during formation of tight junctions, and this activity is required for normal junction formation.
Serotonergic (5-HT) neurons innervate many areas of the central and peripheral nervous systems. The actions of serotonin (5-HT) are mediated by at least 8 distinct serotonin receptor subtypes (5-HT1 to 5-HT7), which are differentially expressed in specific neuronal populations. The 5-HT (2B) receptor has been identified as a tyrosine kinase receptor, activating the MAPK cascade via a pertussis-sensitive pathway. The 5-HT2A receptor has been shown to couple to multiple G-proteins and second messenger systems, activating phospholipase C, and liberating intracellular calcium. The 5-HT2C receptor has also been shown to couple to multiple G-proteins and second messenger systems, activating phospholipase C and adenylate cyclase. The 5-HT2CR receptor has been shown to couple to both the inhibition of adenylate cyclase and the stimulation of phosphoinositide hydrolysis. The 5-HT (2B) receptor has been shown to couple to both phospholipase C and phospholipase D pathways. The activation of these various signalling systems leads to a variety of physiological responses such as platelet activation, vasoconstriction, and the contraction of smooth muscle. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED) < / FREETEXT > < / ABSTRACT > ▃
The body's natural defense against invading cells and pathogens is comprised of two systems: the intrinsic or cellular defense and the extrinsic or lytic system. The intrinsic system consists of neutrophils, macrophages, eosinophils, basophils and natural killer (NK) cells. These cells are not activated until they come in contact with foreign material. The extrinsic system is comprised of platelets and the plasma proteins fibrinogen, prothrombin, factor VII, factor IX, factor X, and the vitamin K dependent proteins, prothrombin activation peptide and activated protein C. The intrinsic system is activated by damage to endothelial cells, damage to membranes, or exposure of platelets. The extrinsic system is activated by the binding of thrombin to the platelet receptor GP1bIX-V complex. This complex is also the receptor for the coagulation factors fibrinogen, prothrombin, factor V, factor VII, and factor X. Binding of thrombin to the complex results in the cleavage of the prothrombin activation peptide and activation of the vitamin K dependent proteins. Factor VII, factor IX, and factor X are formed from a single chain precursor, prothrombin, in a reaction catalyzed by factor Xa. Activated factor X is part of a proteolytic cascade that leads to the formation of fibrin fibers. The coagulation cascade is amplified by the formation of a fibrin clot, which traps and plugs the clot, and also attracts and activates more platelets. The formation of a clot prevents further damage to the blood vessel and can last for several minutes to several hours. Disease Significance: Most of the clotting factors are formed in the liver. Diseases of the liver or damage to the liver can depress the levels of these factors in the blood resulting in excessive bleeding or clotting disorders. Vitamin K deficiency can result in a similar condition since vitamin K is essential for the formation of factor VII, factor IX, and factor X in the liver. Vitamin K is synthesized in the intestinal tract by bacteria.
The innate immune response is the first line of defense against invading pathogens. Cells of the innate immune response do not become memory cells, but respond to stimuli such as infection rapidly and in a sustained manner. The response is rapid in that innate immune cells respond within minutes to infection. The response is also sustained in that innate immune cells do not become memory cells but respond to infection for hours to days. The innate immune response can be classified into two broad categories, those that respond to conserved microbial components called pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and those that respond to specific microbial products called microbe-associated invariant molecular patterns (MAPs). PAMPs are recognized by toll-like receptors (TLRs), which are members of the pattern recognition receptor family. TLRs are expressed by many cell types in the innate immune system, including macrophages, neutrophils, and natural killer (NK) cells. The recognition of PAMPs by toll-like receptors triggers signaling cascades that activate innate immune responses. The current model for toll-like receptor signaling suggests that the toll-like receptor interacts with an adaptor protein called myeloid differentiation factor 8 8 (MyD8 8). or MyD8 8-like (MAL) in turn recruits IL-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK), TNF receptor associated factor 6 (TRAF6) and transforming growth factor-beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK-1) to the toll-like receptor / adaptor protein complex. IRAK interacts with TRAF6 through the TRAF6-associated adapter protein, resulting in the activation of TAK-1. TAK-1 activates two downstream signaling cascades. One of these cascades leads to the activation of NF-kB and the transcription of inflammatory genes such as IL-1 and TNF. The other cascade leads to the activation of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) that contribute to the expression of interferon genes such as interferon-alpha. Interferon-alpha is critical for the defense against viral infection and is secreted by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) in response to microbial stimuli. The activation of interferon secretion by pDCs is unique to pDCs and is not observed in other cells of the immune system. The molecular mechanism that pDCs use to respond to microbial stimuli is still being investigated but it appears that the presence of interferon-alpha is not required for pDCs to secrete interferon-alpha.
The role of MyD8 8 in Toll-like receptor signaling is well established. However, the role of MyD8 8 in the non-Toll-like IL-1 receptor signaling pathways is not yet clear. In addition, the role of the various isoforms of MyD8 8 is not known. It is possible that the various isoforms of MyD8 8 have distinct functions. It is also possible that different isoforms of MyD8 8 play a role in different cell types. It is also not known if all the IL-1 receptors use the same mechanism for signaling. It is also not known if different IL-1 receptors use the same mechanism for signaling. It is also not known if different agents such as cytokines, growth factors and stress induce the same or different mechanisms for signaling. It is also not known if different agents induce the same or different levels of the various isoforms of MyD8 8.
The role of interferon as a mediator of the cellular response to viral infection is well established. In addition to its role as an antiviral agent, interferon has been implicated in the response to double-stranded RNA, regulation of the immune system, and apoptosis. The pleiotropic nature of the interferon response may be explained in part by the induction of hundred or even a hundred different genes through the activation of multiple distinct signaling pathways. The initial response to viral infection is mediated by recognition of viral components by cellular pattern recognition receptors such as the Toll-like receptors (TLRs). In addition to the TLRs, the cellular response to viral infection can be triggered by double-stranded RNA, a key intermediate in the replication of RNA viruses. The presence of double-stranded RNA triggers the activation of the interferon-inducible dsRNA-dependent protein kinase PKR, which phosphorylates the translation factor elF2a and inhibits translation of cellular mRNAs. PKR also activates the transcription factor NF-kB through the IKK1 kinase and induces the expression of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF. IFN-alpha and other interferon genes are among the first genes to be transcribed in cells infected by viruses. The interferon genes are transcribed by the transcriptional machinery in the cell's nucleus, and their mRNAs are transported to the cytoplasm where they are translated. There are several different interferon proteins encoded by the interferon gene, IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, IFN-gamma, IFN-delta, and IFN-omega. The alpha and beta subtypes are closely related in sequence and are active in different individuals, but act on the same receptor, while the gamma, delta and omega interferons are more divergent in sequence and act on different receptors. The interferons bind to a cell-surface receptor composed of two different subunits, IFNAR-1 and IFNAR-2. Binding of interferon to the receptor causes activation of a JAK / STAT signaling cascade, with the phosphorylation and activation of the transcription factors STAT1 and STAT2, and the formation of the interferon-stimulated gene factor-3 (ISGF3) complex. ISGF3 then translocates to the nucleus and binds to a consensus sequence called the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE), found in the promoters of interferon-stimulated genes. The transcription of many interferon-stimulated genes is dependent on the binding of ISGF3 to the ISRE. Interferon-stimulated genes can also be activated by STAT proteins that are activated by other signaling pathways. For example, the activation of NF-kB by TNF leads to the formation of a different transcription factor, NF-kappB-ISRE, which binds to the ISRE and activates transcription of a different set of genes than ISGF3. The overlapping specificity of transcription factors allows for combinatorial regulation of interferon-stimulated genes.
Human interferon-alpha (hIFN-alpha) is a cytokine that is induced by viral infection and that can lead to the activation of both the innate and adaptive immune systems. There are at least 2 0 subtypes of interferon-alpha encoded by the human genome, and they are all closely related in sequence. The genes for these interferons are clustered together on the short arm of chromosome 2 0. The different interferon-alpha subtypes differ in how well they inhibit viral replication, and this is believed to be due to differences in their N-terminal sequence. The N-terminal sequence includes several amino acids that contribute to the binding of the interferon receptor, and also includes a basic amino acid triplet that contributes to the dimerization of the interferon molecules. The amino acid sequence of the mature interferon-alpha proteins is shown in box 1.
The ietin-mylin-response factor-1 (ERM-1) is a transcription factor that was first identified and characterized through its role as a transcription factor that binds to the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) in the promoter region of interferon-responsive genes. However, recent data indicate that ERM-1 also plays a role in signaling by cytokines such as IL-6 and EPO that do not stimulate interferon gene expression. ERM-1 is activated by tyrosine phosphorylation and binds to a specific DNA sequence PyPyPuPy (N) (3-4) (S). 10 〉 In addition to acting as a transcription factor, ERM-1 is involved in the tyrosine phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domain of the erythropoietin receptor. This phosphorylation is mediated by JAK2 and occurs prior to the association of ERM-1 with the receptor or the activation of transcription. The phosphorylated tyrosine residues on the erythropoietin receptor serve as binding sites for the src homology 2 (SH2) domains of STAT5, which are involved in the transcriptional activation by ERM-1.
The function of the platelet is to provide a bridge between the vascular system and the clotting system and it is critical that platelets be produced in appropriate numbers at the right time. The platelet is a highly specialized cell and its formation is dependent on the coordinated expression of many genes. The platelet is formed from a complex series of differentiation steps that involve the interaction of a precursor cell, the megakaryocyte, with several different cytokines and growth factors. The most well studied of these differentiation steps is the formation of the proplatelet. This process is dependent on the interaction of the megakaryocyte with thrombopoietin (TPO) and the subsequent formation of proplatelets from the proplatelet. The formation of the proplatelet involves the formation of a central bundle of microtubules that is surrounded by a ring of microtubules at the proplatelet membrane. The microtubules extend into the extracellular space to form the marginal band and the proplatelet membrane is thought to be formed by the interaction of glycoproteins in the plasma membrane with those in the marginal band. The extracellular matrix protein fibronectin is also a major component of the marginal band and may play a role in the formation of the proplatelet. The formation of the marginal band is dependent on the interaction of glycoproteins in the plasma membrane with those in the marginal band. The formation of the proplatelet and the subsequent formation of the platelet are dependent on the interaction of TPO with its receptor on the megakaryocyte. The TPO receptor is a member of the cytokine receptor family and is associated with JAK2 kinase activation. The TPO receptor is also unique in the cytokine receptor family in that it does not undergo down regulation of signaling following ligand binding and it is not internalized following ligand binding and receptor activation. The differentiation of the megakaryocyte to the platelet is dependent on the interaction of several different cytokines and growth factors. The interaction of TPO with its receptor on the megakaryocyte induces several different signaling pathways including the activation of JAK / STAT pathways. The activation of TPO signaling is required for the subsequent differentiation of the megakaryocyte but does not induce the actual differentiation of the megakaryocyte. The interaction of TPO with its receptor induces the activation of several different signaling pathways including the activation of JAK / STAT pathways. The activation of TPO signaling is also required for the subsequent differentiation of the megakaryocyte to the platelet. The interaction of TPO signaling is required for the subsequent differentiation of the megakaryocyte to the platelet. The interaction of TPO with its receptor induces the activation of several different signaling pathways including the activation of JAK / STAT pathways. The interaction of TPO signaling is also required for the subsequent differentiation of the megakaryocyte. The interaction of TPO signaling is required for the subsequent differentiation of the megakaryocyte to the platelet.
NK (natural killer) cells are lymphocytes distinct from B and T cells that induce perforin-mediated lysis of tumor cells and virus-infected cells. NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity is triggered by a variety of cell surface receptors, including Ig-like and lectin receptors, as well as by non-receptor mechanisms. The natural cytotoxicity receptor (NCR) family includes NKp4 6, NKp4 4, NKp3 0 and NKp4 6, which are glycoproteins with Ig-like and lectin domains that trigger NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity in the absence of antigen-specific recognition. Ig-like receptors include CD1 6 (FcγRIIIa) and CD24 (FcεRII), which bind IgG and IgE, respectively. NKp4 6, NKp4 4 and NKp3 0 are associated with the CD3ζ and FcεRIγ signaling chains. Upon activation, NK cells release perforin and granzyme, which induce osmotic lysis of the target cell, and secrete cytokines that stimulate the immune response. NK cell cytotoxicity is regulated by several activating and inhibitory receptors, and their interactions determine the balance of stimulatory and inhibitory signals that regulate NK cell activity.
The T Cell Receptor plays a key role in the immune system. It is required for the recognition and response to specific antigens of cells expressing these antigens. The specificity of the receptor is determined by the binding site formed from the mature alpha and beta chains (or gamma and delta in the case of gamma / delta T cells) and a complex of proteins associated with the T cell receptor complex in the membrane of resting cells. The mature alpha / beta heterodimer is expressed at a fixed copy number per cell, while the gamma / delta T cell receptor is expressed at a lower level. The gamma and delta chains are created by the rearrangement of a limited set of gene segments during T cell development in the thymus. The diversity of the gamma and delta repertoires is further increased by the expression of a range of different V segments in the gamma and delta genes combined with a limited set of J and C segments. The result is a population of T cells with a wide range of antigen specificities but with a similar alpha / beta: gamma / delta ratio. The alpha / beta T cell repertoire is estimated to be 10 1 1 distinct receptors while the gamma / delta T cell repertoire is estimated to be 10 1 2. The alpha / beta T cell receptor binds to a complex of foreign peptide in the groove of an MHC molecule with the help of T cell factors. The T cell receptor complex is expressed on the cell surface as a tetramer with the CD3 proteins associated to mediate activation and co-stimulatory signals. Upon activation the T cell can deliver a variety of signals to the cell that it has been activated. The CD28 coreceptor activates a potent activation signal that can be provided by cross-linking with antibody or by binding to its own ligand, the costimulatory molecule B7-1 or B7-2. The T cell receptor activates a signaling cascade that includes the activation of several different protein kinases. The T cell receptor activates three of the four MAPK cascades in the T cell, the JNK / SAPK and ERK kinases and the p38 cascade. The JNK / SAPK cascade is activated by engagement of the T cell receptor and is dependent on the activity of Lck and ZAP70. The ERK kinases are also activated by the T cell receptor but are not dependent on Lck or ZAP70. The p38 kinase is activated by the T cell receptor but is not dependent on Lck or ZAP70. The activation of protein kinases in the T cell receptor signaling pathway is opposed by the action of protein phosphatases. The protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) opposes the activation of the JNK / SAPK cascade while the p38 cascade is enhanced by PTP1B. The activation of protein phosphatases in the T cell receptor signaling pathway is poorly understood. The activation of T cells in vitro also activates protein phosphatases, including PTP1B.
The innate immune response provides a rapid response to invading pathogens without the need for previous antigen exposure. Macrophages and neutrophils respond to bacterial infection by releasing reactive oxygen species and inflammatory cytokines that help protect the host and attract other immune cells. The complement cascade provides a second line of defense that is activated when complement factors bind to foreign cells. The complement system is activated through three different pathways. The classical pathway is activated when antibodies bind to foreign cells, the alternative pathway is initiated by spontaneous activation of complement factors, and the lectin-induced complement pathway is activated by recognition of carbohydrates on the bacterial cell surface. In all three pathways, C3 is activated first, followed by the formation of a C3 convertase that cleaves and activates the remaining complement factors. The C5 convertase leads to the formation of the membrane attack complex, which creates a pore in the bacterial membrane that causes osmotic lysis. The release of reactive oxygen species and inflammatory cytokines by macrophages and neutrophils assists in the immune response to bacterial infection. Macrophage and neutrophil activation also has an important role in the initiation and progression of autoimmune disorders such as lupus. Macrophages and neutrophils from lupus patients have been shown to have an increased production of reactive oxygen species and an increased sensitivity to apoptosis. The increased apoptosis of immune cells may allow more self-antigen to be presented to T cells and stimulate an autoimmune response. NF-kB is a transcription factor that regulates the expression of many genes involved in the immune response. The activation of NF-kB is involved in the production of inflammatory cytokines and is inhibited by IkB proteins. The phosphorylation of IkB by protein kinases such as AKT promotes the degradation of IkB and the activation of NF-kB. The complement cascade also activates NF-kB, although this pathway appears to be more dependent on Syk activation than on protein kinase C.
The Fc Epsilon receptor 1 (FceRI) plays an important role in the immune system by inducing degranulation of mast cells and the release of inflammatory cytokines in response to antigen aggregation. The receptor is also expressed on B cells and macrophages. Cross-linking FceRI with multivalent antigen results in the activation of multiple signaling pathways. The FcRgamma chain is essential for receptor signaling and is an adaptor protein that associates with the receptor complex. In addition to the ITAM in the FcRgamma chain, the FceRI receptor contains an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) in its cytoplasmic domain that is required for signaling. The tyrosine residues in the ITAM are phosphorylated upon receptor aggregation, recruiting the ZAP-7 0 and Syk protein kinases to the ITAM. Phosphorylation of the adaptor proteins LAT and SLP-76 leads to the activation of downstream pathways including the MAPK and calcium pathways. The MAPK pathways include the Erk, JNK and p38 pathways. The calcium pathway includes the activation of PKC and the Calcineurin eurin dependent transcription of cytokine genes. The activation of these pathways results in the transcriptional induction of inflammatory genes such as IL-4, IL-13 and TNF-alpha.
The Fc receptor for IgG, also known as FcgammaRI, is a high affinity receptor for IgG that is expressed on the surface of macrophages, neutrophils, and natural killer cells. It is the receptor that initiates the phagocytosis of IgG-coated particles and the release of inflammatory mediators in response to immune complexes. The FcRIII protein is a heterodimer of an extracellular domain that binds IgG, a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic domain. The cytoplasmic domain contains two tyrosine residues that are phosphorylated during receptor signaling and that participate in signal transduction. One of the tyrosines, tyrosine 6 4 1, is part of a sequence that conforms to the consensus sequence for binding of the src family kinases, Fyn, Hck, and Lyn, and that is required for phagocytosis. The other tyrosine, tyrosine 6 3 1, is the binding site for the tyrosine kinase Syk. The phagocytosis of IgG-coated particles by neutrophils and macrophages is dependent on actin polymerization, is stimulated by the activation of Rac, and is inhibited by the activation of Rho. The inhibition of Rho by C3 transferase results in the activation of phagocytosis and the activation of Rho. The activation of Rho is also dependent on the activity of phosphoinositide 3-kinase. The activation of Rho is also required for the formation of focal adhesions and the stress fibers that are associated with the actin cytoskeleton during phagocytosis and that are induced by the engagement of the Fc receptor. The activation of Rho is also required for Fc receptor-mediated degranulation of neutrophils and for the stimulation of NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity. The activation of phospholipase D also appears to be involved in the activation of NK cells by the Fc receptor.
Cell adhesion is a fundamental feature of multicellular organisms and their constituent cells. In multicellular organisms, adhesion is important for a variety of functions. In the case of epithelial cells, adhesion of the cells in a layer to each other and to a substratum is essential for the formation and function of epithelial tissues. The function of epithelial tissues in the human body includes the formation of tight junctions between cells that prevent the flow of fluid and solutes across the epithelium, formation of epithelial sheets that separate distinct compartments of the body, and formation of apical-to-basolateral polarity of the cells. Epithelial tissues also have adhesion molecules on their surface that mediate interactions between cells and between cells and matrix. The major adhesion molecules in epithelial cells are the cadherins, a family of cell surface glycoproteins that mediate adhesion between cells in a calcium-dependent manner. Epithelial cells express both classical cadherins, such as E-cadherin, and the protocadherins, a family of 2 3 proteins related to the cadherin family that includes PCDH-1 and AMSHD-1. In addition to mediating adhesion between cells, cadherins transduce signals into cells that alter cellular functions. The cadherin family member CDHR-1 mediates cell differentiation and junction formation in response to extracellular signals. In response to Wnt signaling, GSK-3 phosphorylates CDHR-1, causing it to be sequestered in an inactive complex with axin and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). dephosphorylation of CDHR-1, caused by activation of PI3K, leads to the association of beta-catenin with the cadherin complex and their internalization into endosomal vesicles. Wingless signaling also causes the accumulation of beta-catenin in the nucleus, where it activates transcription of genes that regulate proliferation and differentiation. Proteins in the catenins family that associate with the cadherin complex regulate the signaling of CDHR-1. Catenins are associated with the actin cytoskeleton, and changes in their expression or phosphorylation alter cell adhesion and the formation of junctions. Catenins also regulate the signaling of other adhesion molecules like the integrins. Interactions between epithelial cells and their substratum also involve members of the integrin family of cell surface adhesion molecules. Integrins bind to matrix proteins, and also interact with cadherins to mediate adhesion between cells and between cells and the extracellular matrix. In addition to mediating adhesion to other cells, integrins transduce signals into cells that alter cellular functions. The focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a key component of integrin signaling. When activated, FAK phosphorylates downstream targets that alter cellular responses like proliferation. In addition to FAK, several other kinases are activated by integrin signaling, including members of the Src family. Paxillin is another target of integrin signaling. Paxillin binds to and is phosphorylated by FAK and other kinases in the Src family. The phosphorylation of paxillin and other proteins in response to integrin signaling alters cellular responses like migration and adhesion.
HIV infection is associated with a dramatic reduction in the number of helper T cells, in part because of the cytopathic effects of the virus on helper T cells. The loss of helper T cells impairs the immune system and allows the virus to replicate more efficiently. Helper T cells are required for the normal immune response to viral infection. There are two distinct helper T cell populations, Th1 and Th2, distinguished by the cytokines they produce and the immune responses they induce. Th1 cells produce cytokines such as IFN-g, TNF-b, and IL-2, and are involved in cellular immune responses, such as killing of infected cells. Th2 cells produce cytokines such as IL-4, IL-5, IL-6 and IL-10, and are involved in humoral immune responses, such as production of antibodies. Th1 and Th2 cells are produced from a common precursor cell population by differentiation in response to different cytokines. The differentiation of Th1 and Th2 cells is influenced by the T cell coreceptor expressed, CD54 (Th1 cells) or CD56 (Th2 cells). CD80 and CD86 (B7 family proteins) provide a costimulatory signal with the TCR that is required for T cell activation. CD40 and CD40L (CD14 family protein) provide another costimulatory signal with TCR that is required for T cell activation and differentiation. HIV infection increases expression of CD54, reduces expression of CD40, and reduces production of IL-2 by helper T cells. The reduction in IL-2 production by HIV-infected helper T cells may be caused by the increased expression of CD54 on these cells. IL-2 is a key cytokine in the immune system, helping to activate and expand T cells, and is the target of the HIV immunosuppressive action. Reduced IL-2 production by HIV-infected helper T cells may contribute to the helper T cell depletion observed in HIV infection.
The N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) glutamate receptor is involved in the postsynaptic response to glutamate at synapses in the central nervous system. The binding of glutamate to the amino terminal domain of the subunit NR1 in combination with the subunits NR2A-D results in the opening of a channel which allows the influx of calcium. The increase in intracellular calcium stimulates a number of signalling cascades one of which is the activation of nitric oxide synthase (NOS). nitric oxide (NO) is a free radical that is involved in a number of physiological processes including vasodilation and neurotransmission. NO is produced from L-arginine by the enzyme nitric oxide synthase (NOS). NO is rapidly turned over in the bloodstream and so is not observed in its presence. However, by activating guanylate cyclase, NO increases the concentration of cGMP in cells. The increase in cGMP activates a cGMP dependent protein kinase (PKG) which phosphorylates a number of proteins including the cGMP-inhibited phosphodiesterase (PDEIII). The phosphorylation of PDEIII results in a decrease in cAMP concentration and a down-regulation of the cAMP dependent signalling pathways such as the PKA. The down-regulation of the cAMP pathway may be a means of regulating NO production or it may indicate that NO is involved in other signalling pathways.
The role of AKT in cell survival has been extensively reviewed recently. This section will cover the role of AKT in cell cycle progression and the role of AKT in angiogenesis. The involvement of AKT in several signaling pathways makes it a key molecule in a number of cellular processes.
The release of glutamate from nerve terminals in the hippocampus leads to the activation of both NMDA and non-NMDA receptors on postsynaptic neurons. Non-NMDA receptors include KA receptors and mGluRs. KA receptors are ligand-gated ion channels that do not desensitize and are composed of the subunits GluR5-7. mGluRs are G-protein coupled receptors that can be divided into three groups based on their sequence and signaling properties. mGluR1 and mGluR5 are coupled to the phospholipase C pathway, activating it through the Gq G-protein and stimulating the production of IP3. IP3 binds to its receptor in the ER to release calcium from that store. Intracellular calcium increases in response to glutamate, and activates PKC and many other pathways. The activity of KA receptors and mGluRs is regulated by protein phosphatases 1 and 2A. The KA receptor KA2 is inhibited by phosphorylation of a serine residue by PKA. The inhibition of KA2 by PKA is relieved when the KA receptor is dephosphorylated by PP2A. The activity of group III mGluRs (mGluR4-7) is also regulated by phosphorylation. PKA phosphorylation of Thr5 8 8mGluR4 blocks the receptor from being activated by glutamate. PP2A dephosphorylates and activates the receptor.
The olfactory receptor family is the largest of the G-protein coupled receptor gene families and is responsible for the detection of odorants in the nasal cavity. The olfactory receptor family is comprised of approximately 1, 4 0 0 genes organized into 1 5 different families based on sequence similarity. Each family is comprised of approximately 1 0 0 members. Olfactory receptor neurons express a single olfactory receptor gene from the repertoire of approximately 1, 4 0 0 genes, with the exception of the male specific Golf protein, which is expressed in a small subset of neurons. The olfactory receptor gene is located on chromosome 2p2 1 and is expressed in a monoallelic fashion in mature olfactory receptor neurons. The protein product of the olfactory receptor gene is anchored to the cilia, microvilli and cilia / knob of the olfactory receptor neuron through interaction with the G-protein, transducin. The binding of odorant to the olfactory receptor triggers the activation of the G-protein and the subsequent activation of adenylyl cyclase III, which catalyzes the production of cyclic AMP. The increase in cAMP activates protein kinase A, which in turn phosphorylates various targets including the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB). The activity of many of the olfactory receptors is regulated by protein kinase C, which phosphorylates the receptor to downregulate its activity. The activity of the olfactory receptor family is also regulated by the ubiquitin-mediated proteolytic pathway. The activity of the olfactory receptor is also affected by the local protein environment in the cilia. The proteins CNGB1 and CNGA2 are required for the function of the olfactory receptor channel. The presence of these two proteins is required for the olfactory receptor to function. In addition to being required for the function of the olfactory receptor channel, CNGA2 is involved in the proteolytic removal of olfactory receptors from the plasma membrane. The ubiquitin-mediated proteolytic pathway also removes the olfactory receptor from the plasma membrane. The regulation of the activity of the olfactory receptor family is a complex process involving a variety of factors.
The AMP-activated protein kinase, also known as the SNF1 kinase, is a metabolic checkpoint kinase activated by metabolic stresses such as glucose deprivation or mitochondrial inhibition that increase the cellular AMP: ATP ratio. The AMP-activated protein kinase is a heterotrimer with a kinase subunit and a regulatory subunit. The kinase subunit has a high sequence homology with the yeast kinase, SNF1, and has been identified as AMPKalpha. The regulatory subunit has a molecular weight of 30kDa and has been identified as AMPKgamma. There are two isoforms of the regulatory subunit, AMPK1and AMPK2in mammals. The binding of AMP to the gamma subunit activates the kinase whereas the association of ATP with the kinase inhibits kinase activity. The binding of AMP causes a conformational change in the kinase that allows it to phosphorylate its substrates. AMPK is a key regulator of energy homeostasis in cells and is activated by stresses that increase the cellular AMP: ATP ratio, such as glucose deprivation or treatment with the anti-cancer drug 5-flurouracil. The activation of AMPK phosphorylates downstream targets that stimulate energy production such as the uptake and metabolism of glucose and fatty acids, and inhibits energy-consuming processes such as protein synthesis. In addition to regulating energy homeostasis, AMPK is a key regulator of cell survival during metabolic stress. ogues that activate AMPK such as the cytokine leptin, are also activators of autophagy. The activation of AMPK by the anti-cancer drug 5-flurouracil may provide a survival signal to prevent apoptosis in cancer cells. One of the targets of AMPK is the tumor suppressor p60l3k. AMPK phosphorylates and activates p60l3k in vitro. The phosphorylation of p60l3k by AMPK may contribute to the activation of AMPK by energy stress.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is the master regulator of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis and its signaling has been the focus of intense research for over three decades. The peptide is a key regulator of many physiological processes, including the release of gonadotropins from the pituitary gland, and is the master regulator of the reproductive cycle. GnRH is a decapeptide (pGlu-His-Trp-Ser-Tyr-Gly-Leu-Arg-Pro-Gly-NH2), which is secreted in a pulsatile manner by the hypothalamus, and binds to the GnRH receptor in the pituitary to stimulate the release of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH). GnRH is the master regulator of the reproductive cycle, and its signaling has been the focus of intense research. The GnRH receptor belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) gene family and is coupled to the Gq family of G-proteins, stimulating the release of intracellular calcium and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3). The signaling pathway downstream of IP3 includes the activation of protein kinase C and the release of intracellular calcium. The GnRH receptor is also coupled to a number of other signaling pathways, including the activation of adenylate cyclase, and the MAP kinase pathways. The activation of these pathways contributes to the overall signaling of GnRH but are not essential for GnRH to stimulate gonadotropin release. The pulsatile secretion of GnRH that occurs in vivo is believed to be the key to its physiological function, including its role in regulating the release of gonadotropins. The regulation of the pulsatile secretion of GnRH is not well understood, but may involve the action of autocrine / paracrine factors, such as prostaglandins, or the release of GnRH at the membrane of the GnRH neuron itself. The action of GnRH at the pituitary is mediated by the GnRH receptor, which is coupled to multiple signaling pathways. The pulsatile release of GnRH may be mediated by some combination of the above signaling mechanisms.
The cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs) are key regulators of the cell cycle. The activity of these kinases is regulated by association with cyclins and by the phosphorylation of the CDK subunits. The activity of the CDK-cyclin complexes drives the cell through the different phases of the cell cycle and into the next phase to repeat the cycle. The CDK-cyclin complexes are regulated by a variety of mechanisms including the phosphorylation of the CDK subunits and the interaction with CDK inhibitors and activators. The interaction of the CDKs with their regulators and the cyclins is a key point of control in the cell cycle. The activity of the CDKs is also regulated by the phosphorylation of the CDK subunits. CDK5 is a CDK that is not involved in cell cycle regulation but which has a role in neuronal development. The activity of CDK5 is regulated by association with a different cyclin, p3 5. The activity of CDK5 is regulated by phosphorylation and by association with a CDK5 activator protein, which is similar to the CDK inhibitors found in the cell cycle CDKs. The activity of the CDK5 activator is regulated by association with p3 5 or p3 9, which are expressed in a tissue specific manner. The activity of the CDK activators is also regulated by phosphorylation. The cyclin dependent kinases are targets of checkpoint controls that prevent the cell cycle from progressing through phases that would be inadvisable for the organism. The DNA damage checkpoint controls prevent the cell from progressing through the cell cycle if the DNA is damaged. The ATM protein kinase activates the DNA repair machinery in response to DNA damage and activates the cell cycle checkpoint controls by phosphorylating the checkpoint kinases Chk1 and Chk2. These kinases inactivate the CDK-cyclin complexes by phosphorylating the CDK subunits or by phosphorylating the cyclins. The activity of the CDK-cyclin complexes is also regulated by the CDK inhibitors and activators. The CDK inhibitors, such as p15INK, prevent the CDKs from interacting with the cyclins. The activity of the CDK activators is regulated by the CDK kinases. The CDK activators are phosphorylated by the checkpoint kinases to become active. The CDK inhibitors are phosphorylated by the CDKs to become inactive.
The melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) is a G-protein coupled receptor that plays a key role in the response of skin melanocytes to ultraviolet light. MC1R is stimulated by its agonist, alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH), and stimulates the production of eumelanin, a brown to black pigment form. In contrast, the red / yellow pigment formed from the reddish-brown pheomelanin is stimulated by the MC1R antagonist, agouti signaling protein. The opposing actions of alpha-MSH and agouti signaling modulate the ratio of the two pigment types in the skin and the overall appearance of the skin, hair and eyes.
The adipokine adiponectin is associated with improved glucose tolerance and reduced risk of diabetes. This effect appears to be mediated through several pathways including activation of the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and inhibition of inflammation. In cultured cells, adiponectin activates the AMPK pathway and this effect is blocked by the fatty acid synthase inhibitor cerulenin. In addition to activating the AMPK pathway, adiponectin also activates the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) and the orphan receptor-a, PPAR-gamma coactivator-1 alpha (PGC-1a). The adiponectin receptor (AdipoR) is predicted to be a G-protein coupled receptor. One possibility is that the AdipoR interacts with the T-cadherin protein to transduce a signal. Another possibility is that the AdipoR interacts with the integrin-adhesion molecule, very late antigen-4 (VLA-4). VLA-4 is a heterodimer of alpha and beta subunits and is expressed on lymphocytes and eosinophils. The beta subunit of VLA-4 binds to its ligand, fibronectin, while the alpha subunit binds to the extracellular matrix protein collagen. The interaction of VLA-4 with either collagen or fibronectin activates intracellular signaling pathways including protein kinase C, map kinases and NF-kB. The activation of VLA-4 by either collagen or fibronectin also results in increased expression of the adhesion molecules LFA-1 and Mac-1, increasing the affinity and number of integrin receptors on the cell surface. The combined activation of the AMPK, PPAR-gamma and VLA-4 pathways may explain the improved glucose tolerance and reduced risk of diabetes associated with elevated levels of adiponectin.
Skeletal muscle accounts for > 8 0% of insulin-dependent glucose disposal, and defects in insulin signaling in muscle are central to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. The major insulin signaling pathway in muscle cells involves the activation of PI3-kinase and the protein kinase AKT / PKB, which in turn activate the glucose transporter GLUT4 and other signaling proteins that stimulate glucose disposal. The insulin resistance of type 2 diabetes may result from a failure of muscle cells to respond normally to insulin signaling. The IRS proteins are key targets of insulin signaling, and their phosphorylation by the insulin receptor causes them to recruit signaling molecules to the plasma membrane. The phosphorylation of IRS-1 and IRS-2 leads to the activation of PI3-kinase and the downstream AKT / PKB pathway, and these events are essential for insulin signaling. The suppressor of cytokine signaling proteins, SOCS-3, opposes insulin signaling by blocking the phosphorylation of IRS-1 and IRS-2. The expression of SOCS-3 is induced by inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, and may play a role in insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes. Another target of PI3-kinase activation by insulin is the protein kinase PDK1. PDK1 activates AKT / PKB and also several other protein kinases involved in insulin signaling, including the atypical protein kinases C (PKC). The activity of PKC is regulated by the lipid second messenger diacylglycerol and by the phosphorylation of a threonine residue in the activation loop. The crystal structure of PDK1 has revealed the basis for its unique action as a kinase and provides a framework for the rational design of inhibitors of this enzyme.
The immune system contains two major classes of cells, B cells and T cells. B cells produce immunoglobulins, which are used as antigen-binding receptors to recognize and bind specific antigens. T cells are the agents of cellular immunity, and only T cells that have been activated by exposure to antigen-presenting cells (APCs) can carry out specific immune responses. APCs are cells that take up and present antigen to B cells and T cells in the form of MHC-bound antigen. In the case of B cells, the antigen is presented in the context of the B cell MHC molecule, MHC-II, to B cell antigen receptor (BCR). T cells, on the other hand, do not express MHC-I to present antigen to other T cells, and must first present antigen in the context of MHC-I. T cell antigen receptor (TCR), a complex of proteins on the T cell surface, binds to MHC-I bound antigen, activating the T cell. APCs are found in two distinct forms in the body, macrophages and dendritic cells. Both types of APC are found in the spleen, where they are found in close association with B and T cells. Macrophages are involved in the clearance of bacteria, while dendritic cells are involved in the processing and presentation of antigen to T cells in the lymph nodes and other tissues. The process of antigen uptake and presentation by APC to B and T cells is called antigen presentation. The key to antigen presentation is the expression of MHC molecules on the surface of B and T cells, and the expression of costimulatory molecules that interact with MHC and TCR to increase the immune response. If B cells or T cells do not express MHC-I or MHC-II, then no immune response will occur. The costimulatory molecules that play a key role in antigen presentation by B and T cells are B7-1 (CD154), B7-2 (CD152) and CD28. Other costimulatory molecules involved in immune responses include ICOS (inducible T cell costimulator) and CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4). The absence of any of these molecules results in a drastic reduction in the immune response. Antigen-bound MHC-I / antigen complex is recognized and bound by TCR on T cells, and the activation of T cell is dependent on additional interactions between T cell costimulatory molecules and their ligands on APCs. B7-1 and B7-2 bind to CD2 8 on T cells, stimulating T cell activation. CTLA-4, a receptor that shares homology with CD2 8, binds with higher affinity than CD2 8 and inhibits T cell activation. ICOS is a T cell protein that is only expressed on activated B cells and binds to B7-2. The interaction of B and T cells is further enhanced by the production of IL-10 by B cells, which acts to increase the expression of MHC-II and B7-2 on B cells. IL-10 also acts to repress the production of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1beta, IL-6 and TNF-alpha by activated T cells. The interaction of B and T cells is essential for the normal functioning of the immune system. Insufficient numbers of B cells or too few of B cells with abnormal function can lead to disease, while an excess of B cells can result in autoimmune disorders.
The generation of specialized cells from undifferentiated precursor cells requires the coordinated expression of sets of genes encoding transcription factors, signaling molecules, and markers of cellular differentiation. A key step in the regulation of gene expression is the binding of transcription factors to specific sequences in the promoter or enhancer regions of genes. The coordinated expression of transcription factor genes ensures the correct temporal and spatial expression of genes encoding proteins that define the various cell types of the body. Defects in the regulation of transcription factor genes can lead to developmental defects and disease. The differentiation of pancreatic islet beta-cells into insulin secreting cells is one of a few well-characterized developmental pathways. The identification of transcription factors that regulate beta-cell development has the potential to lead to the generation of insulin producing cells for use in the treatment of diabetes.
The sodium pump, or sodium-potassium ATPase (Na, K-ATPase), is a heterodimer composed of a catalytic subunit (alpha) and a glycoprotein subunit (beta). There are at least 4 different alpha isoforms (alpha 1-4) and 3 different beta isoforms (beta 1-3). The tissue distribution and kinetic properties of the isoforms vary. The sodium pump is expressed in all cells, but its activity is regulated by a variety of factors, including hormones, growth factors and cytokines. In epithelial cells, the activity of the sodium pump is regulated by hormones and growth factors through interaction with the cytoskeleton. In response to these factors, Na, K-ATPase is recruited from an intracellular pool to the apical surface of the cell. This recruitment is mediated by the ezrin / radixin / moesin binding phosphoprotein 50 (EBP50), which binds both the beta-subunit of Na, K-ATPase and the actin cytoskeleton. In addition to regulating the activity of the sodium pump, growth factor signaling also affects the expression of the sodium pump. The expression of the sodium pump is also regulated in a tissue specific manner. The expression of the sodium pump is upregulated during development in some tissues, and this is in part due to increased expression of the beta-subunit. In addition, the expression of the sodium pump is also regulated in a tissue specific manner. The expression of the sodium pump is reduced in some forms of cardiac failure and in some forms of hypertension. The reduced expression of the sodium pump may be due to reduced expression of the beta-subunit or to reduced expression of the alpha-subunit.
The cilium is a microtubule based structure that is found on the surface of many cells. Defects in the structure or function of the cilium can result in a variety of disorders known as ciliopathies. The cilium is involved in many important cellular processes including the regulation of cell cycle, signaling and the response to fluid flow in the kidney. The cilium is anchored to the cell surface through a structure known as the transition zone, which contains a group of proteins including RPGR, RPGRIP1, RPGRIP1L and TZ JATD / UNK. The transition zone also regulates entry of proteins into the cilium, and defects in this process can result in ciliopathies such as Joubert syndrome. In addition to proteins involved in the formation of the transition zone, a number of other proteins regulate the entry of proteins into the cilium. The pathway regulating entry of proteins into the cilium includes the membrane receptor arginine vasopressin receptor 2 (AVPR2), and the G protein Galphas. Binding of arginine vasopressin to AVPR2 activates the G protein Galphas, which activates adenylate cyclase 6 (AC6). The increase in cAMP levels and the activation of protein kinase A then leads to phosphorylation of the transition zone protein RPGR, allowing other proteins to enter the cilium. The transition zone also regulates the entry of other proteins, including the Hedgehog signaling factor SMO, into the cilium. The Hedgehog signaling pathway plays a role in development in many organisms, and defects in this pathway can result in a variety of developmental disorders such as holoprosencephaly when Hedgehog signaling is not properly regulated. The Hedgehog signaling pathway is activated by binding of Hedgehog to a receptor complex that includes the receptor Patched and the transmembrane protein Smoothened. Patched inhibits Smoothened activity in the absence of Hedgehog. Hedgehog binding relieves inhibition of Smoothened, allowing Smoothened to activate downstream factors such as the transcription factor Gli. Hedgehog signaling is blocked by the protein Suppressor of Fused (SUFU), which interacts with both Hedgehog and Gli proteins. SUFU interacts with dynein, a microtubule based motor, and may be involved in the transport of Hedgehog factors into the cilium. In addition to playing a role in the Hedgehog signaling pathway, the cilium also plays a role in the response of cells to fluid flow in the kidney. Defects in the cilium result in polycystic kidney disease, and the proteins involved in the formation of the cilium also play a role in this process. The flow of water through the cilium activates a calcium flux in the cilium, and this calcium flux is involved in the regulation of fluid flow in the kidney. Calcium is regulated by the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR), and also by the ryanodine receptor (Ryr), another calcium release channel. Both of these proteins are found in the cilium, along with the calcium channel PKD2L1. Calcium entry into the cilium is regulated by the motor protein dynein, and also by the protein intraflagellar transport (IFT). Defects in the proteins involved in calcium regulation and calcium signaling also result in polycystic kidney disease.
This group of genes does not group into a meaningful cluster.
The mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC), which is composed of a series of protein complexes in the inner mitochondrial membrane, is the major source of cellular ATP. The ETC consists of a series of protein complexes that transfer electrons from NADH to O2 to create a gradient of protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane that is used to drive ATP synthesis. The mitochondrial genome encodes for 1 3 proteins that are part of the electron transport chain. Complexes I, III and IV are multi-subunit protein complexes involved in electron transport, while complex II is a single subunit protein. The mitochondrial genome encodes for subunits of complex I (NADH dehydrogenase), complex III (cytochrome b) and complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase). The remaining subunits are encoded in the nucleus and are therefore subunits of multiple protein complexes. The exact role of the mitochondrial genome in the assembly of these complexes is not known. However, it has been suggested that the mitochondrial genome may play a role in the assembly of complex III and IV, as well as in the stability of these complexes. The 1 3 proteins encoded by the mitochondrial genome are essential for the function of the electron transport chain. Mutations in the mitochondrial genome that result in a loss of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are associated with a number of mitochondrial diseases. The severity of these diseases correlates with the percentage of mutant mtDNA present in the cell. Diseases associated with mitochondrial genome mutations include: myoclonus epilepsy and ragged red fibers (MERRF); progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO); and Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS). a. mtDNA mutations result in defective polypeptides b. Defective tRNA's may also result in disease. In some cases, tRNA mutations result in disease by altering the translation of proteins. In addition to affecting the translation of specific proteins, mitochondrial tRNA mutations may also alter the structure of the mitochondrial ribosome, resulting in a general decrease in the translation of all mitochondrially encoded proteins. c. Defective complex III and IV may result in disease through a similar mechanism.
Glutamatergic-mediated neuronal cell death is a key component of several neurodegenerative conditions including Alzheimer's disease. In vitro, neuronal cell death can be induced by exposure of neurons to the neurotransmitter glutamate, or to the glutamate receptor agonist NMDA. The cell death pathway induced by glutamate or NMDA is distinct from apoptosis and is mediated by the perphrin homology domain of caspase-dependent Bid (tBid). tBid translocates to the mitochondria, where it interacts with Bax and promotes the release of mitochondrial cytochrome c. Cytochrome c, in turn, activates Apaf-1 and caspase-9, ultimately leading to caspase-3 activation and cell death. The requirement for Bid in this pathway indicates that neuronal cell death via the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway is distinct from apoptosis in other cell types. The pathway is blocked by calcineurin inhibitors, indicating that it is dependent on calcineurin activity. The requirement for Bid indicates that the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway is also distinct from the intrinsic apoptosis pathway used by many other stimuli. The pathway may be triggered by excessive stimulation of the NMDA receptor, or by direct calcium influx through the NMDA channel. The pathway may also be triggered by other stimuli that increase intracellular calcium, such as exposure to staurosporine. The pathway is blocked by inhibitors of calpain, a calcium-dependent protease. Calpestatin is required for Bid cleavage and apoptosis induced by calcium influx. The calpain inhibitor also blocks cell death induced by the amyloid peptide A beta, which also induces apoptosis via a calcium-dependent mechanism. Cells that overexpress Bcl-xL or that lack Bax are resistant to the calcium-dependent pathway, indicating that the pathway is activated via the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway. The pathway may also be involved in other neurodegenerative conditions in which apoptosis is involved.
Mitochondria are the major source of cellular ATP and are also involved in other important functions such as apoptosis, aging, and perhaps even the release of signaling molecules in response to oxidative stress. Mitochondria are found as discrete organelles in the cell or as a continuous network in neurons. Mitochondrial movement and distribution in neurons is regulated in part by the Miro / Milton complex, which interacts with kinesin to mediate movement of mitochondria to the synapse. The mitochondrial genome is a bit more complex than that of other eukaryotic genomes. Mammalian mitochondrial DNA is a double-stranded, closed-circular molecule of approximately 16, 5 0 0 bp that encodes 1 3 proteins involved in energy transduction and 1 2S and 1 6S rRNA and 22t RNA required for translation. All other mitochondrial proteins are encoded in the nuclear genome and are translated in the cytosol. The mitochondrial genome is not transcribed nor translated alone but is transcribed and translated as a polyprotein precursor that is cleaved by mitochondrial proteases to yield the mature proteins. Transcription of the mitochondrial genome is regulated coordinately with the nuclear genome through the action of a mitochondrial transcription factor, mtTFB. In addition to regulating mitochondrial genome expression, mtTFB also regulates nuclear genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis. The nuclear transcription factor CREB binds to the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 7A2 (Cox7A2) promoter and upregulates its expression. This suggests that, like cytochrome c, cytochrome c oxidase is a member of a coordinately regulated gene set. The coordinated expression of mitochondrial and nuclear genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis ensures that the appropriate number of mitochondria are present in a cell at any given time.
The classical complement pathway is a part of the immune system, providing a response against infection by triggering the lysis of bacterial cells and the phagocytosis of foreign cells. The complement system also plays a role in inflammation and immune surveillance. The complement system is composed of over thirty different proteins found in the plasma and on cell surfaces. The complement system is activated by three different mechanisms, the classical pathway, the alternative pathway and the lectin-induced pathway. In the classical pathway, antibody complexes on the cell surface bind to complement factor C1, a complex of two proteins, C1-q and C1-r. When antigen-antibody complexes are recognized by C1, the complex is activated through the interaction of C1-q with C1-r. Activated C1-r cleaves and activates C4 and C2 to form C4b and C2a. C4b2a cleaves large numbers of C3 to form C3a and C3b. The amplification of the C3 convertase on the cell surface leads to the formation of a more C3 convertase. The addition of new C3 convertase increases the number of C3 molecules cleaved each time a convertase is formed, creating a positive feedback loop. The central step in the complement system is the formation of the membrane attack complex (MAC), a pore in the bacterial membrane that creates a hole in the membrane, allowing ions to flow freely between the cellular interior and exterior. This results in osmotic lysis of the cell and the release of inflammatory factors that stimulate the immune response.
The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is a cAMP-activated chloride channel that is defective in cystic fibrosis. It is predicted to be a member of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter gene family, but has no significant sequence similarity to other proteins. It has been found that defects in CFTR cause viscous mucus that blocks the lungs and other organs causing the severe disease cystic fibrosis. CFTR is found in the apical membrane of epithelial cells in the lungs, intestine, and other tissues. It is believed that defects in airway surface liquid (ASL) caused by lack of CFTR-mediated chloride secretion leads to impaired mucociliary clearance and chronic infection that leads to lung failure in patients with cystic fibrosis. It has been suggested that CFTR acts as a regulator of other ion channels, such as the sodium channel ENaC and the chloride channel ClC-0. In addition, it has been suggested that CFTR may itself conduct chloride. It has been suggested that CFTR may act as a regulator of other ion channels, such as the sodium channel ENaC, the chloride channel ClC-0, and the potassium channel KCC-1. In addition, CFTR has been suggested to perturbe another aspect of epithelial cell function through an alteration in intracellular cAMP levels caused by an imbalance in the secretion and absorption of cAMP by epithelial cells. In addition to acting as a chloride channel, CFTR is also a cAMP-activated protein kinase A (PKA) substrate. In its role as a protein kinase A (PK-A) substrate, CFTR is phosphorylated at multiple sites. It has been suggested that phosphorylation of CFTR by PKA may regulate its channel activity.
The role of CD4 4 in inflammation has been the subject of many recent investigations. This cell surface glycoprotein functions as a receptor for extracellular matrix glycoproteins, including hyaluronan (HA), and as a cell adhesion molecule. Alternative splicing of a variable region exon composition in the 5 'end of the gene results in expression of variant forms of CD4 4 that include 0, 1, or 2 tandem repeats of the alternatively spliced domain, encoded by exons v1-v1 0. The standard form of CD4 4 (CD4 4s) is the most abundant form expressed on leukocytes and many other cell types. The variant forms of CD4 4 (CD4 4v) are expressed in a tissue-specific manner and are involved in the migration and proliferation of cells. CD4 4v can be induced by cytokines and can act as a co-receptor with other proteins in signal transduction. The cytoplasmic domain of CD4 4v contains a ezrin, radixin, moesin (ERM) binding site that may mediate interaction with the actin cytoskeleton, and a proline-rich region that may interact with signaling molecules. CD4 4v can associate with several signaling molecules. The intracellular domain of CD4 4v contains a binding site for the src family kinases Lck and Hck that may be involved in activation of NF-AT and AP-1 transcription factors during lymphocyte activation. CD4 4v can also associate with the chemokine receptors CXCR4 and CCR5, which are involved in the migration of leukocytes to inflammatory sites. Binding of the chemokine SDF-1 (stromal cell-derived factor-1) to CXCR4 in lymphocytes activates ras and downstream signaling pathways involving PI3 kinase, Akt, and NF-kB to induce lymphocyte chemotaxis. Interaction of SDF-1 with CD4 4v on hematopoietic cells also induces tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of several signaling molecules, including Pyk2, Lck, and Fyn. The association of CD4 4v with MMPs may also play a role in inflammation. MMPs are a family of proteolytic enzymes involved in the degradation of extracellular matrix proteins that are also involved in the cleavage of inactive cytokines and chemokines. The activation of MMP-9 by CD4 4v on macrophages may play a role in the migration of leukocytes to inflammatory sites.
The role of Neutrophils in immune surveillance is not well understood, but it is believed that they help protect the body from invading bacteria through the release of reactive oxygen species and the secretion of antimicrobial peptides. The neutrophil response to bacterial infection is called the oxidative burst, and is induced by cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF that stimulate the expression of NADPH oxidase components and other proteins involved in the response. The oxidative burst is accompanied by the release of antimicrobial peptides such as lysozyme and the protease cathepsin G. Neutrophils are maintained in the circulation in a quiescent state prior to activation, and the expression of proteins involved in the response is induced by cytokines such as IL-8 and GM-CSF. The IL-8 receptor is a GPCR, and the signaling pathway includes the activation of a map kinase cascade, ultimately activating NF-kB. The GM-CSF receptor is also a GPCR, and the pathway includes activation of JAK kinases and the p38 kinase. The GM-CSF receptor also includes a JAK2 component, and the response includes phosphorylation of STAT transcription factors. The activation of neutrophils by cytokines may not be the only role of neutrophils, however. Neutrophils express MHC molecules not found on other cells, and neutrophils also express the costimulatory receptor CD4. T cells that express CD4 respond to interaction with antigen-presenting neutrophils through the CD4 receptor, inducing cytokine expression and proliferation. The interaction of neutrophils with CD4 + T cells may play a role in the immune response, in addition to the more obvious role of neutrophils in immune surveillance.
The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is activated by many different cell-surface receptors and plays a key role in cell survival, proliferation and growth. In T cells, the PI3K pathway plays a role in T cell receptor signaling as well as in the survival of resting T cells. PI3K phosphorylates the D3 position of phosphatidylinositides, producing phosphatidylinositides with a phosphate on the D3 position (PIP3). PIP3 acts as a docking site for proteins with pleckstrin homology (PH) domains, including AKT / PKB (protein kinase B). AKT is phosphorylated and activated by PDK1 (phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1) and mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin). AKT promotes cell survival by inhibiting the actions of several apoptosis inducing factors, including Bad, caspase 9 and AFX (also called XIAP). T cell receptor signaling activates AKT independently of PI3K, and acts through phosphorylation of the forkhead transcription factor AFX to promote T cell survival. The role of PI3K in T cell receptor signaling may be to phosphorylate the tyrosine residues of LAT (linker for activation of T cells), allowing for the recruitment of Shc and the Grb-2 / Sos-1 complex to the membrane to activate the Ras pathway. Ras activates the Map kinase pathway, including Mek, Erk and Erk, and also the AKT pathway to phosphorylate and inactivate AFX. The role of PI3K in T cell receptor signaling may be to phosphorylate LAT, allowing for the recruitment of Shc and the Grb-2 / Sos-1 complex to the membrane to activate the Ras pathway. The role of AKT in T cell receptor signaling may be to phosphorylate AFX to prevent its inactivation by the Map kinase pathway.
Hypoxic stress, or low O2 levels, activates the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor, HIF-1. HIF-1 is a heterodimer of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta subunits. HIF-1 induces the expression of genes that promote cell survival and growth under hypoxic conditions. HIF-1 is stabilized and activated by hypoxia, iron chelation, and oxidative stress. HIF-1 is a member of a family of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors that also includes HIF-2 and HIF-3. The HIF-1 subunits are members of a larger group of bHLH-PAS proteins, including the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), and the single-minded (SIM) proteins. HIF-1 and ARNT dimerize to form a functional transcription factor, HIF-1. HIF-1 and ARNT also dimerize with HIF-2 and HIF-3 to form similar complexes. HIF-1 and HIF-2 regulate the expression of a large number of genes involved in cellular responses to hypoxia, including angiogenesis, erythropoiesis, glucose metabolism, and respiration. HIF-1 is stabilized and activated by hypoxia, iron chelators, and oxidative stress. The HIF-1 protein is ubiquitinated and degraded rapidly under normoxic conditions, but is stabilized and activated by hypoxia. HIF-1 is stabilized and activated by hypoxia due to decreased ubiquitination and degradation. The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein (pVHL) is involved in HIF-1 ubiquitination and degradation. Under normoxic conditions, pVHL targets HIF-1 for ubiquitin-mediated degradation. HIF-1 is stabilized and activated by hypoxia. HIF-1 is the master regulator of O2 homeostasis and a member of a family of bHLH-PAS transcription factors that are activated by environmental and xenobiotic stimuli.
The angiogenic switch, the shift from preangiogenesis to angiogenesis, is a crucial component of tumor growth and metastasis. The signaling pathways that regulate this angiogenic switch are attractive therapeutic targets for the treatment of cancer. The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway is a key regulator of angiogenesis and has been shown to play an important role in tumor angiogenesis. VEGF expression is upregulated by hypoxia, a common feature of rapidly growing tumors. VEGF binds to its receptor, VEGFR-2, on the surface of endothelial cells. This interaction stimulates signaling through several pathways including the MAPK and PI3 kinase pathways to promote endothelial cell proliferation and survival. VEGF signaling is opposed by the actions of anti-angiogenic factors such as thrombospondin-1. The balance of positive and negative regulators of angiogenesis in a particular setting is critical for the maintenance of normal physiology and the prevention of disease. In cancer, the up-regulation of positive angiogenic factors and the down-regulation of negative factors result in an imbalance favoring angiogenesis and the formation of new blood vessels. This imbalance may be caused by multiple mechanisms, including gene amplification, transcriptional activation, and protein stabilization. The angiogenic switch may be induced by hypoxia, directly through activation of the transcription factor HIF-1, or indirectly through activation of oncogenes such as ras or myc. VEGF expression is also induced by cytokines such as TGF-beta and IL-8. In addition to its role in tumor angiogenesis, VEGF plays a role in normal physiological processes such as wound healing and retinal development. VEGF expression is increased in a variety of human cancers, correlating with disease stage and prognosis. Anti-angiogenic therapy has been pursued as a means of cancer treatment, with the hope that by blocking angiogenesis it may be able to slow or halt tumor growth. Preclinical studies have demonstrated the potential of anti-angiogenic therapies, and several agents in this class have been or are being tested in the clinic. The most advanced of these agents are monoclonal antibodies against VEGF or VEGFR-2, and are the furthest along in clinical development. The activity of these agents as single agents has been modest, with response rates of less than 1 0% in phase II studies. The most promising results have been seen in combination with standard chemotherapy. VEGF is a key mediator of angiogenesis and is a key target for cancer therapy. The activity of anti-VEGF agents as single agents may be limited by redundancy in angiogenic signaling and the presence of angiogenic inhibitors in the tumor microenvironment. The combination of anti-VEGF agents with other anti-cancer agents may prove more efficacious.
The epidermal growth factor (EGF) peptide induces cellular proliferation through the EGF receptor, a member of the ErbB family of tyrosine kinase receptors. The ErbB family includes EGF receptor (ErbB1), ErbB2 (HER2), ErbB3 (HER3) and ErbB4 (HER4). The ErbB proteins are composed of an extracellular domain that binds EGF, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular domain with tyrosine kinase activity. The ErbB proteins form dimers with one another to create signaling complexes. EGF induces the formation of a dimer between ErbB1 and either ErbB2 or ErbB3. The EGF / ErbB1 dimer is rapidly internalized and degraded, while the ErbB-2 / 3 and ErbB-3 / 4 heterodimers are slowly internalized. The distinct fates of the EGF receptors are determined by the association of different ErbB proteins with the clathrin-dependent endocytosis pathway. The phosphorylated tyrosine residues of the EGF receptor serve as binding sites for proteins with Src homology 2 (SH2) or phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domains. The ErbB-3 and ErbB-4 proteins lack intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity but serve as signaling partners for the other ErbB proteins through the recruitment of other signaling factors. The ErbB proteins are involved in the activation of several signaling pathways. The EGF receptor activates the Ras / Map kinase pathway through the Shc, Grb2 and Sos proteins. The EGF receptor also activates PI3 kinase through the adapter proteins Gab1 and Gab2, and the p85 regulatory subunit of PI3 kinase. The PI3 kinase pathway activates Akt, a kinase that phosphorylates proteins such as Bad, that inhibit apoptosis. The EGF receptor also activates the STAT transcription factors STAT3 and STAT5. The activation of STAT3 and STAT5 by the EGF receptor opposes the activation of STAT1 and STAT1-mediated gene expression. The activation of STAT3 and STAT5 by the EGF receptor opposes the activation of STAT1 and STAT1-mediated gene expression.
The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway plays a key role in cell survival, metabolism, growth and proliferation. The pathway is activated by a variety of stimuli including growth factor receptors, integrins and antigen receptors. The first step in the pathway is activation of PI3K, which generates phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) at the plasma membrane. PIP3 binds to and activates the kinase AKT (also called PKB). AKT phosphorylates several targets involved in cell survival, growth and proliferation such as the protein kinase GSK-3 and the transcription factor NF-kB. The activity of PI3K and the AKT pathway are inhibited by the tumor suppressor PTEN. Mutation or inactivation of this pathway may play a role in cancer development.
The epidermis, which provides a protective barrier, is a multi-layered tissue with the proliferating cells located in the basal layer. As cells leave the basal layer the underog significant differentiation. The final differentiation results in the formation of corneocytes. The final differentiation markers include proteins that are unique to the corneocytes such as loricrin, and others that are specific for the desquamating cells. In addition to the morphological changes there is a dramatic change in gene expression with the expression of proteins specific for the desquamating cells. The final differentiation of the keratinocyte is also associated with the expression of a protein kinase C that is not found in the proliferating cell. This protein kinase C has been identified as the p44 / p38 MAP Kinase. The activation of p44 / p38 is associated with but does not necessarily require the final differentiation of the keratinocyte.
The RET gene encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase that is expressed in the brain, colon, and thyroid. Mutations in RET are associated with several cancer types including multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) and Hirschsprung disease. The MEN2A and MEN2B syndromes are associated with amino acid substitutions in RET that increase the tyrosine kinase activity of the receptor. MEN2A is associated with a high incidence of thyroid cancer and a low incidence of pheochromoctyes, whereas MEN2B is associated with a very high incidence of both tumors. The specific MEN2A mutation (Cys634Arg) has been shown to increase the ability of RET to dimerize, and this may be responsible for the different clinical phenotypes. In addition to activating mutations, a truncation mutation that removes the C-terminal 1 0 amino acids has been identified in patients with Hirschsprung disease. This mutation does not activate kinase activity, but appears to interfere with normal receptor folding and processing. RET forms a receptor complex with either of two coreceptors, GFRalpha1 or GFRalpha2, and their ligands, GDNF family ligands (GFLs). The RET receptor has a single transmembrane domain, an extracellular domain, and an intracellular domain containing a tyrosine kinase domain. Binding of GFL to the GFRalpha receptor recruits RET to the cell surface, and activates the kinase domain. The downstream signaling pathways activated by RET are not yet clear, but appear to involve several pathways commonly associated with tyrosine kinase receptors. One of the downstream effectors of RET activation is the Shc / Grb-2 pathway, which leads to activation of ras and the MAP kinase pathway. Another pathway activated by RET involves PI3 Kinase and the AKT kinase. Another target of RET activation is the transcription factor ELK-1. ELK-1 is involved in the differentiation of neurons in the central and peripheral nervous systems. The role of RET in neuronal development may also extend to the thyroid, where RET may play a role in the development of the ultimobranchial bodies.
Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is one of a family of secreted proteins that includes Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) and Desert Hedgehog (Dhh). These proteins play important roles in development. In the developing CNS, Shh is involved in the proliferation of neuronal precursor cells in the developing cerebellum and neural tube. In the developing limb, Shh plays a role in the proliferation of chondrocytes and the formation of bone. The proliferative response to Shh is mediated by the transcription factor Gli. In the absence of Shh, the N-terminal fragment of the transcription factor Gli1 is cleaved and degraded. Shh binding to the receptor complex activates smoothened (Smo), a G-protein coupled receptor. Smo activation leads to the activation of Gli transcription factors, including Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3, which can then activate transcription of genes involved in proliferation. The pathway downstream of Smo is not well understood, but may include inhibition of GSK-3b activity and activation of b-catenin. Wnt family members may also play a role in the activation of Gli by Shh.
The fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family of proteins and their receptors play critical roles in many developmental and physiological processes. The FGF family includes at least 2 2 distinct polypeptides, 1 8 of which bind to one of four FGF receptors (FGFR1-4). Alternative splicing of the FGFR1-3 genes results in the production of several receptor isoforms differing in their extracellular domains. The different FGF ligands and their receptors form complex signaling cascades that are both complex and redundant in their nature. Many of the FGF responses are mediated by the Ras-MAP kinase pathway, and also by PI3 kinase. FGF stimulation also leads to activation of the JAK / STAT pathway. The activation of STAT transcription factors by FGF receptors may play a role in the induction of S phase by FGF in some cells.
Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels, is a complex, multi-step process regulated by a balance of positive and negative signals. The positive signals include vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). Negative regulators include thrombospondin 1 and 2. The process is also regulated by inflammatory cytokines and hypoxia. In normal tissues, angiogenesis is tightly regulated, with minimal growth of blood vessels. However, in the presence of hypoxia, angiogenic factors are released by tumor cells, stimulating endothelial cell proliferation and migration into the extracellular matrix. The newly formed vessels then become stabilized and undergo further remodeling, resulting in the formation of functional blood vessels. This process is regulated by a balance of positive and negative signals, and an imbalance in this process can result in aberrant angiogenesis and the growth of tumors. VEGF is a key regulator of angiogenesis and is upregulated by hypoxia. High levels of VEGF are associated with increased tumor angiogenesis and a more aggressive tumor phenotype. VEGF expression is transcriptionally regulated by hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). The activity of HIF-1 is also regulated by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase / Akt pathway and by the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene. The VHL protein binds to HIF-1 and targets it for ubiquitin-mediated degradation. Inactivation of the VHL gene leads to the accumulation of HIF-1 and the subsequent upregulation of VEGF and other genes involved in angiogenesis. VEGF is a key angiogenic factor and its expression is regulated by multiple signaling pathways. The expression of VEGF is upregulated by growth factors such as EGF, TGFalpha, and by oncogenes such as Ras. Inhibitors of angiogenesis include thrombospondin and PEDF. The expression of PEDF is upregulated by retinoic acid and is downregulated by VEGF. Other signaling pathways involved in angiogenesis include the integrins, the MAPK pathway and the PKC pathway. The regulation of angiogenesis by multiple signaling pathways provides multiple opportunities for the development of novel anti-angiogenic agents.
The role of the human papillomavirus (HPV) in the development of anogenital cancers has been well established. In addition, recent data suggest that HPV may also play a role in the development of head and neck cancers. The viral oncoproteins E6 and E7 are involved in the immortalization and transformation of cells. E6 binds to and degrades the tumor suppressor protein p5 3. E6 also interacts with the ubiquitin ligase complex E6-AP, resulting in increased ubiquitination and degradation of p5 3. E7 binds to the retinoblastoma gene product (Rb), a key regulator of the cell cycle, and displaces the E2F transcription factor, causing unchecked cell cycle progression. Additional activities of E6 and E7 include the inactivation of other tumor suppressor genes and the activation of cellular oncogenes. Knowledge of the molecular mechanisms involved in HPV-associated carcinogenesis will continue to provide important insights into the role of viruses in the development of cancer and may provide the basis for the development of improved cancer therapies.
The role of the ribosome in coordinating translation with the cell cycle has been a topic of interest for some time. A key player in this process is the ribosomal protein S6 kinase, S6K1. S6K1 is activated by phosphorylation in response to mitogens and growth factors through the mTOR / FRAP kinase pathway and also by phosphorylation in response to genotoxic stress. Activated S6K1 phosphorylates the ribosomal protein S6, which in turn stimulates the translation of mRNAs with a 5 'oligopyrimidine tract. Some mRNAs that contain a 5' oligopyrimidine tract encode for factors involved in translation. The translational activation of these mRNAs leads to an increase in the overall rate of protein synthesis and contributes to the progression of the cell cycle from the G1 to the S phase. In addition to regulating translation, S6K1 phosphorylates the tumor suppressor p53 to block apoptosis and also phosphorylates MDM2 to block its interaction with p5 3 and promote apoptosis and growth arrest in response to DNA damage. The phosphorylation of p53 and MDM2 by S6K1 opposes the tumor suppressor functions of these proteins.
The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in the behavior of cells. The interaction of cells with the ECM affects cellular shape, adhesion, migration, proliferation, and apoptosis. The ECM is composed of several macromolecules such as collagen, fibronectin, and laminins that provide a scaffold for cells to adhere to and interact with. Cells also secrete a variety of soluble factors, such as growth factors and cytokines, that communicate with other cells in the surrounding environment. Interactions between cells and the ECM are mediated by cell surface receptors, integrins, that bind to specific sequences in the ECM and soluble factors. Integrins are a family of cell surface receptors that consist of alpha and beta subunits that combine to form functional receptors. Integrins are involved in the adhesion of cells to the ECM as well as the transduction of signals into the cell in response to ECM binding. Several integrins expressed by epithelial cells interact with the ECM to regulate growth. For example, the interaction of epithelial cells with collagen IV is mediated by alpha2beta1 integrin. In addition to mediating adhesion to the ECM, integrins can transduce signals into the cell in response to binding to the ECM. Integrins alter cellular behavior by interacting with several intracellular signaling molecules including FAK, paxillin, and Shc. Paxillin and FAK are adaptor proteins that bind to each other and other signaling molecules to form a complex that initiates downstream signaling events in response to integrin activation. Src kinase activity is increased in response to integrin activation and is required for integrin-mediated activation of the ERK / MAPK pathway. Paxillin is also tyrosine phosphorylated in response to integrin activation and may serve as a scaffold for other signaling molecules in the integrin-mediated activation of ERK / MAPK. Activation of the integrin-mediated ERK / MAPK pathway is required for the stimulation of cell cycle progression by ECM proteins and is required for cell cycle progression in cells on ECM. In addition to regulating cell cycle progression, the integrin-mediated activation of the ERK / MAPK pathway also protects cells from apoptosis. ECM deprivation induces apoptosis in epithelial cells through a mechanism that requires activation of the ERK / MAPK pathway. either. et al. demonstrated that ECM deprivation induces apoptosis in epithelial cells through activation of the intrinsic (mitochondrial) apoptotic pathway. ECM deprivation results in the detachment of integrin alpha2beta1 heterodimers from the focal adhesion complex, which induces the association of FAK and src. Association of FAK and src results in the tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin. Activation of the ERK / MAPK pathway by ECM results in the activation of anti-apoptotic proteins such as BCL-2 and inhibits the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway.
The nuclear receptor RXR is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that forms heterodimers with several nuclear receptors, including the retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and the vitamin D receptor (VDR). RXR also forms homodimers that are activated by vitamin A. 9-cis retinoic acid (9cisRA) is the most potent retinoid ligand for RXR, and is the naturally occurring form of all-trans retinoic acid (atRA). Several synthetic retinoid ligands have been developed that are selective for the RXR / RAR or RXR / VDR heterodimers. These ligands are called rexinoids and are distinct from the vitamin D analogs that bind the VDR but do not activate transcription. The physiological role of the RXR / retinoid receptors is to mediate the action of retinoid ligands in the regulation of differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis. RXR ligands such as 9cisRA can induce apoptosis in some cells in culture and in vivo, but generally do not induce differentiation. The ability of RXR ligands to induce apoptosis may be independent of their role as retinoid receptors and may be mediated through the activation of the protein kinase C pathway. Several genes have been identified that are activated by RXR ligands and may mediate the apoptotic response. One of these genes is the p15 gene, which is activated by RXR ligands in a protein kinase C dependent manner but does not have a classical retinoic acid response element. The induction of p15 by RXR ligands results in the stabilization of the tumor suppressor p53 and the sensitization of cells to apoptotic signals. Other genes activated by RXR ligands include the death receptor Fas and the p53 inhibitor FAP-1. The activation of p15 by RXR ligands may also involve cross-talk with other signaling pathways such as the EGF receptor pathway.
For the most part, T cells are activated by recognition of specific antigens in the context of MHC molecules on the surface of antigen-presenting cells. T cell activation requires two signals: one provided by the recognition of the antigen by the T cell receptor (TCR) and the other provided by interaction of costimulatory molecules between the T cell and the antigen-presenting cell. The T cell receptor is a multisubunit complex with multiple subunits that are required for antigen recognition and signaling. The T cell receptor complex includes the T cell receptor (TCR), the CD3 complex, and CD4 or CD8 in the case of helper or cytotoxic T cells. The CD3 subunits (gamma, delta, epsilon, and alpha or beta) are integral membrane proteins with a single transmembrane domain that are required for the association of the TCR with the plasma membrane and for the transduction of the activation signal. The TCR is a heterodimer with the alpha and beta subunits having similar structure and are associated with the gamma and delta subunits to form the T cell receptor for the majority of T cells. The CD4 or CD8T molecule is required for the efficient activation of helper T cells and it provides a costimulatory signal in association with the TCR. The coreceptor provided by helper T cells is usually CD40. The CD40 complex is formed by the association of CD40 with a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family. The CD40-CD40L interaction is a key mediator of B cell activation and provides a key costimulatory signal in the activation of T cells. The activation of T cells induces the expression of a number of genes that are involved in the regulation of T cell activation.
The body's immune system consists of two parts, the innate and the adaptive immune systems. The innate immune system provides the first line of defense against invading organisms, and responds quickly to infection. The adaptive immune system is comprised of B cells, T cells and antigen-presenting cells (APCs). B cells are responsible for producing antibodies, and T cells are responsible for coordinating and regulating the response to specific antigens. B cells first produce antigen-specific immunoglobulins, known as antibodies, that are secreted into the extracellular space to protect against infection. T cells are the central players of the adaptive immune system, and are classified as either helper or cytotoxic cells. Helper cells provide essential signals for the activation and proliferation of B cells and cytotoxic T cells, while cytotoxic T cells induce apoptosis of infected cells. To communicate with each other and the rest of the immune system, B and T cells express a set of unique antigen receptors, the immunoglobulins on B cells and the T cell receptors (TCRs) on T cells. The specificity of the immune system is determined by the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) and light chain (IgL) genes in B cells and the TCR genes in T cells, respectively. Each B cell and T cell expresses a unique receptor that is generated by the recombination of the IgH, IgL, and TCR genes. The recombination of these gene segments occurs in the developing lymphocyte in the bone marrow, and is completed in the mature lymphocyte in the periphery. If the recombination occurs before the lymphocyte is fully mature, then the cell will not be able to participate in the immune system. The specificity of the immune system is further enhanced by the expression of MHC molecules on the surface of B and T cells, required for recognition of antigens by the immune system, and by the expression of costimulatory molecules required for efficient B and T cell activation. While B cells only express immunoglobulin receptors, T cells require additional coreceptor complexes to be activated by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and to respond to specific antigens. B cells express MHC-1 and MHC-2, while T cells only express MHC-2. T cell activation is initiated by the recognition of antigen by the TCR, in the presence of costimulatory signals provided by the APC. The interaction between CD40 and CD40L is a key costimulatory signal in the B cell / T cell interaction, and is required for B cell activation. T cell activation is also regulated by other costimulatory signals, including the CD45 protein tyrosine phosphatase activity that dephosphorylates TCR signaling components and terminates B cell activation. The regulation of B and T cell activation ensures that the immune system is only activated when and where it is required to prevent infection and harmful autoimmune responses.
CD4 + helper T cells and CD8 + cytotoxic T cells are key components of the cellular immune response. The CD4 + T cell population is subdivided into two distinct subsets based on their expression of the coreceptors CCR5 and CXCR4 and their respective chemokine ligands. The CCR5 + cells are memory T cells that express high levels of the chemokine receptor CCR5 and are tropic for the HIV envelope protein CCR5 ligand, while the CXCR4 + cells are central memory T cells that express high levels of CXCR4 and are tropic for the envelope protein CXCR4 ligand SDF-1. The balance of these cells and the expression of their chemokine receptors may be important in the progression of HIV disease. CXCR4 + cells are depleted early in infection while the CCR5 + cells are expanded during the later stages of infection. The central memory cells are thought to be long-lived cells and are thought to be the source of the more pathogenic viral variants. The expression of these chemokine receptors and their ligands may also play an important role in other disease processes such as the progression of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma.
NK (natural killer) cells and cytotoxic T cells are two distinct cell types that provide a first line of defense against viral infection and tumor cells. NK cells do not require prior activation to exert their cytotoxic effects, but induce apoptosis in viral infected or tumor cells. Cytotoxic T cells are activated by recognition of specific antigens on the surface of cells, and require additional signals to become fully activated. Upon activation, cytotoxic T cells induce apoptosis in target cells and release cytokines that stimulate the immune response. The cytotoxic activity of NK cells and cytotoxic T cells is regulated by interactions between proteins expressed on the cell surface, including killer cell immunoglobulin like receptors (KIRs) and MHC-1 molecules, and proteins in the perforin protein complex. When bound to MHC-1, KIR proteins transmit inhibitory signals to the cytotoxic T cell that prevent activation. The perforin protein complex is released by cytotoxic T cells to form pores in the membrane of the target cell, allowing the passage of granzyme proteins and other molecules to enter the cell. The interaction of MHC-1 with KIR proteins and perforin with granzyme proteins are required for the induction of apoptosis in the target cell. This review will cover the genes and proteins involved in NK cell and cytotoxic T cell function, with an emphasis on the interactions between MHC-1 and KIR proteins.
This group of genes does not group into a meaningful cluster.